
--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
 
LECTURE NOTES  
 
 
ON  
 
 
EMBEDDED SYSTEMS DESIGN  
 
IV B. Tech I semester (R15)  
 
 
 
 Faculty Members  
 
N.SURESH  
Asst.Professor  
ECE Dept  
 


--- Page 2 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                                ESD SYLLABUS  
 
ECE Dept   
 MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY  
IV Year B.Tech. ECE -I Sem  
CORE ELECTIVE – III 
EMBEDDED SYSTEMS DESIGN  (R15A0424)  
COURSE OBJECTIVES:  
For embedded systems, the course will enable the students to:  
 1. Understand the basics of an embedded system.  
 2. Understand the typical components of an embedded system.  
 3. To understand different communication interfaces.  
 4. To learn the design process of embedded system applications.  
 5. To understands the RTOS  and inter -process communication.  
UNIT -I    INTRODUCTION TO EMBEDDED SYSTEMS  
History of embedded systems, Classification of embedded systems based on generation and 
complexity, Purpose of embedded systems, The embedded system design process -requirements, 
specification, architecture design, designing hardware and software, components, system 
integration, Applications of embedded systems, and characteristics of embedded systems.  
UNIT -II   TYPICAL EMBEDDED SYSTEM  
Core of the embedded system -general purpose and  domain specific processors, ASICs, PLDs, 
COTs; Memory -ROM, RAM, memory according to the type of interface, memory shadowing, 
memory selection for embedded systems, Sensors, actuators, I/O components: seven segment 
LED, relay, piezo buzzer, push button swi tch, other sub -systems: reset circuit, brownout 
protection circuit, oscillator circuit real time clock, watch dog timer.  
UNIT -III   COMMUNICATION INTERFACE  
Onboard communication interfaces -I2C, SPI, CAN, parallel interface ;  
External communication interfac es-RS232 and RS485, USB, infrared, Bluetooth, Wi -Fi, 
ZigBee, GPRS, GSM.  
 

--- Page 3 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                                ESD SYLLABUS  
 
ECE Dept   
 UNIT -IV   EMBEDDED FIRMWARE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT  
Embedded firmware design approaches -super loop based approach, operating system based 
approach; embedded  firmware development langua ges-assembly language based development, 
high level language based development.  
UNIT -V   RTOS BASED EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN  
Operating system basics, types of operating systems, tasks, process and threads, multiprocessing 
and multitasking, task scheduling: non -pre-emptive and pre -emptive scheduling; task 
communication -shared memory, message passing, Remote Procedure Call and Sockets, Task 
Synchronization: Task Communication/ Synchronization Issues, Task Synchronization 
Techniques  
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems - shibu k v, Mc Graw Hill Education.  
2. Computers as Components –Wayne Wolf, Morgan Kaufmann (second edition).  
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1. Embedded System Design -frank vahid, tony grivargis,     john Wiley.  
2. Embedded Systems - An integrated approach - Lyla b das, Pearson education 2012.  
3. Embedded Systems – Raj Kamal, TMH  
 
COURSE OUTCOMES:  
 
Upon completion of this course, the students will be able to:  
1. Understand the  design process of an  embedded system  
2. Understand typical embedded System & its components  
3. Understand embedded firmware design approaches  
4. Learn the basics of OS and RTOS  
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 1 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
UNIT -I 
INTRODUCTION TO EMBEDDED SYSTEMS   
 
 
 
 
 
 EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN  
IV YEAR ECE  

--- Page 5 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 2 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems  
What is  Embedded  System?  (DEC2016,  March -2017 .) 
 
An Electronic/Electro mechanical system which is designed to perform a specific function and is 
a combination of both hardware and firmware (Software)  
 
E.g. Electronic Toys, Mobile Handsets, Washing Machines, Air Conditioners, Automotive 
Control Units, Set Top Box, DVD Player etc…  
Embedded Systems are:  
❑ Unique in character and  behavior  
❑ With specialized hardware and  software  
Embedded Systems Vs General  Computing  Systems:  (March -2017 ) 
 
General Purpose Computing System  Embedded System  
A system which is a combination of generic 
hardware and General Purpose Operating System 
for executing a variety of applications  A system which is a combination of special 
purpose hardware and embedded OS for 
executing a specific set of applications  
Contain a General Purpose Operating System  
(GPOS)  May or may not contain an operating system  
for functioning  
Applications are alterable (programmable) by 
user (It is possible for the end user to re -install  the 
Operating System, and add or remove user 
applications)  The firmware of the embedded system is 
pre-programmed and it is non -alterable by 
end-user 
Performance is the key deciding factor on the 
selection of the system. Always „Faster is Better‟  Application  specific  requirements  (like 
performance, power requirements, memory 
usage etc) are the key deciding  factors  
Less/not at all tailored towards reduced operating 
power requirements, options for different levels 
of power management.  Highly tailored to take advantage of the 
power saving modes supported by  hardware 
and Operating  System  
Response requirements are not time critical  For certain category of embedded systems 
like mission critical systems, the response 
time requirement is highly critical  
 
Need not be deterministic in execution behavior  Execution  behavior  is  deterministic  for 
certain type of embedded systems like „Hard 
Real Time‟  systems  


--- Page 6 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  
 Page 3  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 History of Embedded Systems:  
 
➢ First Recognized Modern Embedded System: Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) developed by  
Charles Stark Draper  at the MIT Instrumentation  Laboratory.  
 
 It has two  modules
 1.Command module(CM) 2.Lunar  Excursion
module(LEM)  
 RAM size 256 , 1K ,2K  words
 ROM size 4K,10K,36K  words
 Clock frequency is  1.024MHz 
 5000 ,3 -input RTL NOR gates are  used
 User interface is  DSKY(display/Keyboard) 
➢ First Mass Produced Embedded System: Autonetics D-17 Guidance computer for Minuteman -I missile  
 
Classification of Embedded Systems:  
❑ Based on  Generation  
❑ 
Based on Complexity & Performance  Requirements  
❑ 
Based on deterministic  behavior 
❑ 
Based on Triggering  
1. Embedded Systems - Classification based on 
Generation   
 
(March -2017 ) 
 
First Generation: The early embedded systems built 
around 8 -bit microprocessors like 8085 and Z80 and 4 -bit 
microcontrollers  
EX. stepper motor control units, Digital Telephone Keypads etc.  
 
Second Generation : Embedded Systems built around 16 -bit microproc essors and 8 or 
16-bit microcontrollers, following the first generation embedded systems  
EX.SCADA, Data Acquisition Systems etc.  
 
Third Generation: Embedded Systems built around high performance 16/32 bit 
Microprocessors/controllers, Application Specific Instruction set processors like Digital 
Signal Processors (DSPs), and Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs).The 
instruction set is complex and powerful.  
EX. Robotics, industrial process control, networking etc.  

--- Page 7 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  
 Page 3  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 8 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
Fourth Generation: Embedded Systems built around System on Chips (SoC’s), Re - 
configurable processors and multicore processors. It brings high performance, tight 
integration and miniaturization into the embedded device market  
EX Smart phone devices, MIDs etc.  
 
2. Embedded Systems - Classification based on Complexity &  Performance   
 
➢ Small Scale: The embedded systems built around low performance and low cost 8 or 16 
bit microprocessors/ microcontrollers. It is suitable for simple applications and where 
performance is not time critical. It may or may not contain  OS. 
 
➢ Medium Scale : Embedded Systems built around medium performance, low cost 16 or 32 
bit microprocessors / microcontrollers or DSPs. These are slightly complex in hardware 
and firmware. It may contain  GPOS/RTOS.  
 
➢ Large Scale/Complex: Embedded Systems built around high pe rformance 32 or 64 bit 
RISC processors/controllers, RSoC or multi -core processors and PLD. It requires 
complex hardware and software. These system may contain multiple 
processors/controllers and co -units/hardware accelerators for offloading the processing 
requirements from the main processor. It contains RTOS for scheduling, prioritization 
and management.  
 
3. Embedded Systems - Classification Based on deterministic behavior : It is applicable for 
Real Time systems. The application/task execution behavior for an  embedded system can be 
either deterministic or  non-deterministic  
 
These are classified in to two types  
 
1. Soft Real time Systems: Missing a deadline may not be critical and can be  
tolerated to a certain  degree  
 
2. Hard Real time systems: Missing a program/task execution time deadline can have 
catastrophic consequences (financial, human loss of life,  etc.) 
 
4. Embedded Systems - Classification Based on Triggering:  
These are classified into two  types  
1. Event Triggered : Activities within the system (e.g., task run -times) are dynamic and 
depend upon occurrence of different events  . 
 
2. Time triggered: Activities within the system follow a statically computed schedule (i.e., 
they are allocated time slots during which they can ta ke place) and thus by nature are 
predictable.  
 
 
 


--- Page 9 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
 
 


--- Page 10 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
 
Major Application Areas of Embedded Systems:  
❑ Consumer Electronics: Camcorders, Cameras  etc. 
❑ Household Appliances: Television, DVD players, washing machine, Fridge, Microwave Oven 
etc. 
 
❑ Home Automation and Security Systems: Air conditioners, sprinklers, Intruder detection 
alarms, Closed Circuit Television Cameras, Fire alarms  etc. 
 
❑ Automotive Industry: Anti-lock breaking systems (ABS ), Engine Control, Ignition Systems, 
Automatic Navigation Systems  etc. 
 
❑ Telecom: Cellular Telephones, Telephone switches, Handset Multimedia Applications  etc. 
❑ Computer Peripherals: Printers, Scanners, Fax machines  etc. 
❑ 
Computer Networking Systems: Network Routers, Switches, Hubs, Firewalls  etc. 
❑ 
Health Care: Different Kinds of Scanners, EEG, ECG Machines etc.  
❑ Measurement & Instrumentation: Digital multi meters, Digital CROs, Logic Analyzers PLC 
systems  etc. 
 
❑ Banking & Retail: Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) and Currency counters, Point of Sales 
(POS) 
❑ Card Readers: Barcode, Smart Card Readers, Hand held Devices  etc. 
Purpose of  Embedded  Systems:  (DEC2016 ) 
 
Each Embedded Systems is designed to serve the purpose of any one or a combination of the 
following tasks.  
 
o Data Collection/Storage/Representation  
o Data Communication  
o Data (Signal)  Processing  
o Monitoring  
o Control  
o Application Specific User Interface  
 
 
 


--- Page 11 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
 
 
 


--- Page 12 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
1. Data  Collection/Storage/Representation: - 
 
❖ Performs acquisition of data from the external 
world. 
 
❖ The collected data can be either analog or 
digital 
 
❖ Data collection is usually done for storage, 
analysis, manipulation and  transmission  
 
❖ The collected data may be stored directly in the system or may be transmitted to some 
other systems or it may be processed by the system or it may be deleted instantly after 
giving a meaningful representation  
 
2. Data  Communication: - 
 
Embedded Data communication systems are deployed in 
applications ranging from complex satellite communication 
systems to simple home networking systems  
 
Embedded Data communication systems are dedicated for data 
communication  
 
The data communication can happen through a  wired 
interface (like Ethernet, RS -232C/USB/IEEE1394 etc) 
or wireless interface (like Wi -Fi, GSM,/GPRS, 
Bluetooth, ZigBee etc)  
 
Network hubs, Routers, switches, Modems etc are  
typical examples for dedicated data transmission embedded systems  
 
3. Data (Signal)  Processing: - 
 
Embedded systems with Signal processing 
functionalities are employed in applications 
demanding signal processing like Speech 
coding, synthesis, audio video codec, 
transmission applications etc  
Computational intensive systems  
 
Employs  Digital Signal Processors (DSPs)  
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 13 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 7  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
4. Monitoring: - 
 
Embedded systems coming under this 
category are specifically designed for 
monitoring purpose  
 
They are used for determining the state of 
some variables using input sensors  
 
They cannot impose control over variables.  
 
Electro Cardiogram (ECG) machine for 
monitoring the heart beat of a patient is a 
typical example for this  
The sensors used in ECG are the different Electrodes connected to the patie nt‟s body  
 
Measuring instruments like Digital CRO, Digital Multi meter, Logic Analyzer etc used in 
Control & Instrumentation applications are also examples of embedded systems for 
monitoring purpose  
5. Control: -  
 
Embedded systems with control 
functionalities are used for imposing 
control over some variables according to 
the changes in input variables  
 
Embedded system with control 
functionality contains both sensors and 
actuators  
 
Sensors are connected to the input port for capturing the changes  in environmental 
variable or measuring  variable  
 
The actuators connected to the output port are controlled according to the changes in input 
variable to put an impact on the controlling variable to bring the controlled variable to the 
specified range  
 
Air conditioner for controlling room temperature is a typical example for embedded 
system with „Control‟ functionality  
 
Air conditioner contains a room temperature sensing element (sensor) which may be a 
thermistor and a handheld unit for setting up (feedin g) the desired temperature  
 
The air compressor unit acts as the actuator. The compressor is controlled according to the 
current room temperature and the desired temperature set by the end user.  
 

--- Page 14 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 8 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
This section provides an overview of the embedded system design process aimed at two 
objectives. First, it will give us an introduction to the various steps in embedded system design 
before we delve into them in more det ail. Second, it will allow us to consider the design 
methodology itself. A design methodology is important for three reasons. First, it allows us to 
keep a scorecard on a design to ensure that we have done everything we need to do, such as 
optimizing perfo rmance or performing functional tests. Second, it allows us to develop 
computer -aided design tools. Developing a single program that takes in a concept for an 
embedded system and emits a completed design would be a daunting task, but by first breaking 
the process into manageable steps, we can work on automating (or at least semi automating) the 
steps one at a time. Third, a design methodology makes it much easier for members of a design 
team to communicate.  
The below Figure summarizes the major steps in the embedded system design process. In this top –down 
view, we start with the system requirements.  
Fig: Major levels of abstraction in the design process  
Requirements:  
Clearly, before we design a system, we must know what we are designing. The initial stage s of 
the design process capture this information for use in creating the architecture and components. 
We generally proceed in two phases: First, we gather an informal description from the customers 
known as requirements, and we refine the requirements into  a specification that contains enough 
information to begin designing the system architecture.  
 
6. Application Specific User Interface: - 
 
Embedded systems which are designed for a specific 
application  
 
Contains Application Specific User interface (rather than 
general standard UI ) like key board,  Display units etc  
 
Aimed at a specific target group of users  
 
Mobile handsets, Control units in industrial applications etc 
are examples  
 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN PROCESS:  


--- Page 15 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 9 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 Requirements may be functional or nonfunctional . We must  of course capture the basic 
functions of the embedded system, but functional description is often not sufficient. Typical 
nonfunctional requirements include:  
■ Performance: The speed of the system is often a major consideration both for the usability of 
the system and for its ultimate cost. As we have noted, performance may be a combination of 
soft performance metrics such as approximate time to perform a user -level function and hard 
deadlines by which a particular operation must be  completed.  
■ Cost: The target cost or purchase price for the system is almost always a consideration. Cost 
typically has two major components: manufacturing cost includes the cost of components and 
assembly; nonrecurring engineering (NRE) costs include the personnel and other costs of 
designing the  system.  
■ Physical size and weight: The physical aspects of the final system can vary greatly depending 
upon the application. An industrial control system for an assembly line may be designed to fit 
into a standard -size rack with no strict limitations on weight. A handheld device typically has 
tight requirements on both size and weight that can ripple through the entire system  design.  
■ Power consumption: Power, of course, is important in battery -power ed systems and is often 
important in other applications as well. Power can be specified in the requirements stage in terms 
of battery life —the customer is unlikely to be able to describe the allowable  wattage . 
A sample requirements form that can be filled out at the start of the project. We can use the form 
as a checklist in considering the basic characteristics of the system. Let’s consider the entries in 
the form:  
■ Name: This is simple but helpful. Giving a name to the project not only simplifies ta lking 
about it to other people but can also crystallize the purpose of the  machine.  
■ Purpose: This should be a brief one - or two -line description of what the system is supposed to 
do. If you can’t describe the essence of your system in one or two lines, chances are that you 
don’t understand it well enough.  
■ Inputs and outputs: These two entries are more complex than they seem. The inputs and 
outputs to the system encompas s a wealth of  detail:  
— Types of data: Analog electronic signals? Digital data? Mechanical  inputs?  
— Data characteristics: Periodically arriving data, such as digital  audio 
samples? Occasional user inputs? How many bits per data  element?  
— Types of I/O devices: Buttons? Analog/digital converters? Video  displays?  
■ Functions: This is a more detailed description of what the system does. A good way to 
approach this is to work from the inputs to the outputs: When the system receives an input, what 
does it do? How do user interface inputs affect these functions? How do different functions 
interact?  
Performance: Many embedded computing systems spend at least some time controlling physical 
devices or processing data coming from the physical world. In most of these cases, t he 
computations must be performed within a certain time frame. It is essential that the performance 
requirements be identified early  
since they must be carefully measured during implementation to ensure that the system works 
properly.  
■ Manufacturing cost: This includes primarily the cost of the hardware components. Even if you 
don’t know exactly how much you can afford to spend on system components, you should have 
some idea of the eventual cost range. Cost has a substantial influence on architecture: A mach ine 
that is meant  to 
sell at $10 most likely has a very different internal structure than a $100 system.  
■ Power: Similarly, you may have only a rough idea of how much power the system can 
consume, but a little information can go a long way. Typically, the most important decision  is 
 

--- Page 16 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 10 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 whether the machine will be battery powered or plugged into the wall.  Battery -powered 
machines must be much more careful about how they spend  energy.  
 
■ Physical size and weight: You should give some indication of the physical size of the system 
to help guide certain architectural decisions. A desktop machine has much more flexibility in the 
components used than, for example, a lapel mounted voice  recorder.  
 
GPS MODULE:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
REQU IREMENTS FORM OF GPS MOVING MAP MODULE:  
Name : GPS moving map  
Purpose: Consumer -grade moving map for driving use 
Inputs : Power button, two control buttons  
Outputs : Back -lit LCD display 400 _ 600  
Functions : Uses 5 -receiver GPS system; three user-selectable resolutions; 
always displays current latitude and longitude  
Performance: Updates screen within 0.25 seconds upon movement 
Manufacturing cost:$30  
Power: 100mW  
Physical size and weight: No more than 2” _ 6 , ” 12 ounces  
 
Specification  
The specification is more precise —it serves as the contract between the customer and the 
architects. As such, the specification must be carefully written so that it accurately reflects the 
customer’s requirements and does so in a way that can be clearly follow ed during design.  
The specification should be understandable enough so that someone can verify that it meets 
system requirements and overall expectations of the customer.  
A specification of the GPS system would include several components:  
▪ Data received fro m the GPS satellite  constellation.  
▪ Map data.  
▪ User  interface.  
▪ Operations that must be performed to satisfy customer  requests.  
▪ Background actions required to keep the system running, such as operating the  GPS 
receiver.  
 


--- Page 17 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 11 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 Architecture Design  
The specification does not say how the system does things, only what the system does. 
Describing how the system implements those functions is the purpose of the architecture. The 
archit ecture is a plan for the overall structure of the system that will be used later to design the 
components that make up the architecture. The creation of the architecture is the first phase of 
what many designers think of as design.  
This block diagram is still quite abstract —we have not yet specified which operations will be 
performed by software running on a CPU, what will be done by special -purpose hardware, and 
so on. The diagram does, however, go a long way toward describing how to implement the 
function s described in the specification. We clearly see, for example, that we need to search the 
topographic database and to render (i.e., draw) the results for the display. We have chosen to 
separate those functions so that we can potentially do them in parallel —performing rendering 
separately from searching the database may help us update the screen more  fluidly.  
 
 
 
 
FIG: BLOCK DIAGRAM FOR THE MOVING MAP  
 
The hardware block diagram clearly shows that we have one central CPU surrounded by memory 
and I/O devices. In particular, we have chosen to use two memories: a frame buffer for the pixels 
to be displayed and a separate program/data memory for general use by the CPU. The software 
block diagram fairly closely follows the system block diagram, but we have added a timer to 
control when we read the buttons on the user interface and render data onto the screen. To have a 
truly complete architectural description,  we require more detail, such as where units in the 
software block diagram will be executed in the hardware block diagram and when operations  
will be performed in time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 18 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 12 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
  
 
Fig : Hardware and software architectures for the moving map . 
 
The architectural description tells us what components we need. The component design effort 
builds those components in conformance to the architecture and specification. The components 
will in general include both hardware —FPGAs, boards, and so on —and software modules. Some 
of the components will be ready -made. The CPU, for example, will be a standard component in 
almost all cases, as will memory chips and many other components .In the moving map, the G PS 
receiver is a good example of a specialized component that will nonetheless be a predesigned, 
standard component. We can also make use of standard software modules.  
 
System Integration:  
Only after the components are built do we have the satisfaction of putting them together and 
seeing a working system. Of course, this phase usually consists of a lot more than just plugging 
everything together and standing back. Bugs are typically found during system integration, and 
good planning can help us find the bugs quickly. By building up the system in phases and 
running properly chosen tests, we can often find bugs more easily. If we debug only a few 
modules at a time, we are more likely to uncover the simple bugs and able to easily recognize 
them. Only by fixing the simple bugs early will we be able to uncover the more complex or 
obscure bugs that can be identified only by giving the system a hard  workout  
 
 


--- Page 19 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 13 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 Characteristics of Embedded  systems : (DEC2016 , March -2017 ) 
 
Embedded systems possess certain specific characteristics and these are unique to each 
Embedded system.  
 
1. Application and domain specific  
 
2. Reactive and Real  Time  
 
3. Operates in harsh  environments  
 
4. Distributed  
 
5. Small Si ze and  weight  
 
6. Power  concerns  
 
7. Single -functioned  
 
8. Complex  functionality  
 
9. Tightly -constrained  
 
10. Safety -critical  
 
1. Application and Domain  Specific: - 
 
• Each E.S has certain functions to perform and they are developed in such a manner to do 
the intended functions  only.  
 
• They cannot be used for any other  purpose.  
 
• Ex – The embedded control units of the microwave oven cannot be replaced with AC‟S 
embedded control unit because the embedded control units of microwave oven and AC 
are specifically designed to perform certain specific  tasks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 20 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
T,VINAYSIMHA REDDY, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  
 
 
2. Reactive and Real  Time: - 
 
• E.S are in constant interaction with the real world through sensors and user -defined input 
devices which are connected to the input port of the  system.  
 
• Any changes in the real world are captured by the sensors or input devices in real time 
and th e control algorithm running inside the unit reacts in a designed manner to bring the 
controlled output variables to the desired  level.  
 
• E.S produce changes in output in response to the changes in the input, so they are referred 
as reactive systems.  
 
• Real Time system operation means the timing behavior of the system should be 
deterministic ie the system should respond to requests in a known amount of  time.  
 
• Example – E.S which are mission critical like flight control systems, Antilock Brake 
Systems ( ABS) etc are Real Time  systems.  
 
3. Operates in Harsh Environment  :– 
 
• The design of E.S should take care of the operating conditions of the area where the 
system is going to  implement.  
 
• Ex – If the system needs to be deployed in a high temperature zone, then all the 
components used in the system should be of high temperature  grade.  
 
• Also proper shock absorption techniques should be provided to systems which are going 
to be commissioned in places subject to high  shock.  
 
4. Distributed:  – 
 
• It means that embedded systems may be a part of a larger  system.  
 
• Many numbers of such distributed embedded systems form a single large embedded 
control  unit. 
 
• Ex – Automatic vending machine. It contains a card reader, a vending unit etc. Each of 
them are independent embedded units but they work together to perform the overall 
vending  function.  
 
5. Small Size and Weight: - 
 
• Product aesthetics (size, weight, shape, style, etc) is an important factor in choosing a 
product.  
 
• It is convenient  to handle a compact device than a bulky  product.  
 
N SURESH , Dept  of ECE  Page  14 

--- Page 21 ---
ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
6. Power  Concerns: - 
 
• Power management is another important factor that needs to be considered in designing 
embedded  systems.  
 
• E.S should be designed in such a way as to minimize the heat dissipation by the  system.  
 
7. Single -functioned: - Dedicated to perform a single  function  
 
8. Complex functionality: - We have to run sophisticated algorithms or multiple algorithms in 
some applications.  
 
9. Tightly -constrained: - 
 
Low cost, low power, small, fast, etc  
 
10. Safety -critical: - 
 
Must not endanger human life and the environment  
 
Quality Attributes of Embedded System:  Quality attributes are the non-functional 
requirements that need to be documented properly in any system design. (DEC16 ,March -2017 ) 
Quality attributes can be classified as  
 
I. Operational quality  attributes  
 
II. Non-operational quality  attributes.  
 
I. Operational Quality Attributes: The operational quality attributes represent the relevant 
quality attributes related to the embedded system when it is in the operational mode or online 
mode.  
 
Operational Quality Attributes are:  
 
1. Response : - 
 
It is the measure of quickness of the system.  
 
It tells how fast the system is tracking the changes in input variables. 
Most of the E.S demands fast response which should be almost real  time.  
Ex – Flight control application.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept  of ECE  Page  15 

--- Page 22 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 18  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
2. Throughput  :- 
 
It deals with the efficiency of a system.  
 
It can be defined as the rate of production or operation of a defined process over a 
stated period of time.  
 
The rates can be expressed in terms of products, batches produced or any other 
meaningful measurements.  
 
Ex – In case of card reader throughput means how many transactions the reader 
can perform in a minute or in an hour or in a day.  
 
Throughput is generally measured in te rms of “Benchmark”.  
 
A Benchmark is a reference point by which something can be measured  
 
3. Reliability  :- 
 
• It is a measure of how much we can rely upon the proper functioning of the system.  
 
• Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) and Mean Time To Repair (MTTR) are the 
terms used in determining system  reliability.  
 
• MTBF gives the frequency of failures in hours/weeks/months.  
 
• MTTR specifies how long the system is allowed to be out of order following a 
failure.  
 
• For embedded system with critical application need, it should be of the order of 
minutes.  
 
4. Maintainability: - 
 
• It deals with support and maintenance to the end user or client in case of technical issues 
and product failure or on the basis of a routine system  checkup.  
 
• Reliability and maintainability are complementary to each  other.  
 
• A more reliable system means a system with less corrective maintainability requirements 
and vice  versa.  
 
• Maintainability can be broadly classified into tw o categories  
 
1. Scheduled or Periodic maintenance (Preventive  maintenance)  
 
2. Corrective maintenance to unexpected  failures  
 
 
 


--- Page 23 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 18  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
5. Security: - 
 
• Confidentiality, Integrity and availability are the three major measures of information 
security.  
 
• Confidentiality deals with protection of data and application from unauthorized 
disclosure.  
 
• Integrity deals with the protection of data and application from unauthorized 
modification.  
 
• Availability deals with protection of data and application from unaut horized  users.  
 
6. Safety  :- 
 
Safety deals with the possible damages that can happen to the operator, public and the 
environment due to the breakdown of an Embedded System.  
 
The breakdown of an embedded system may occur due to a hardware failure or a 
firmware  failure.  
 
Safety analysis is a must in product engineering to evaluate the anticipated damages and 
determine the best course of action to bring down the consequences of damage to an 
acceptable  level.  
II. Non-Operational Quality Attributes: The quality  attributes that needs to be addressed for 
the product not on the basis of operational aspects are grouped under this  category.  
 
1. Testability and  Debug -ability: - 
 
• Testability deals with how easily one can test the design, application and by which means 
it can be done.  
 
• For an E.S testability is applicable to both the embedded hardware and  firmware.  
 
• Embedded hardware testing ensures that the peripherals and total hardware functions in 
the desired manner, whereas firmware testing ensures that the firmware is functioning in 
the expected way . 
 
• Debug -ability is a means of debugging the product from unexpected behavior in the 
system  
 
• Debug -ability is two level  process  
• 1.Hardware  level  2.software  level 
 
• 1. Hardware level: It is used for finding the issues created by hardware  problems.  
 
• 2. Software level : It is employed for finding the errors created by the flaws in the  software.  


--- Page 24 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 18  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
2. Evolvability  :- 
 
• It is a term which is closely related to  Biology.  
 
• It is referred as the non -heritable  variation.  
 
• For an embedded system evolvability refers to the ease with which the embedded product 
can be modified to take advantage of new firmware or hardware  technologies.  
 
3. Portability: - 
 
• It is the measure of system  independence.  
 
• An embedded product is said to be portable if the product is capable of functioning in 
various environments, target processors and embedded operating  systems.  
 
• „Porting‟ represents the migration of embedded firmware written for one target processor 
to a different target  processor.  
 
4. Time -to-Prototype and  Market: - 
 
• It is the time elapsed between the conceptualization of a product and the time at which 
the product is ready for  selling.  
 
• The commercial embedded product market is highly competitive and time to market the 
product is critical factor in the success of commercial embedded  product.  
 
• There may be multiple players in embedded industry who develop products of the same 
category (like mobile  phone).  
 
5. Per Unit Cost and  Revenu e:- 
• Cost is a factor which is closely monitored by both end user and product  manufacturer.  
 
• Cost is highly sensitive factor for commercial  products  
 
• Any failure to position the cost of a commercial product at a nominal rate may lead to the 
failure of the product in the market.  
 
• Proper market study and cost benefit analysis should be carried out before taking a 
decision on the per -unit cost of the embed ded product.  
 
• The ultimate aim of the product is to generate marginal profit so the budget and total cost 
should be properly balanced to provide a marginal  profit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 25 ---
N SURESH , Dept of ECE  Page 19  ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY  
1. An embedded system is an electronic/electromechanical system designed to perform a 
specific function and is a combination of both hardware and firmware  (software).  
2. A general purpose computing system is a combination of generic hardware and general 
purpose operating system for executing a variety of applications, whereas an  embedded  
3. System is a combination of special purpose hardware and embedded OS/firmware for 
executing a specific set of  applications.  
4. Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) is the first recognized modern embedded system and 
Autonetics D -17, the guidance computer for the Minuteman -I missile, was the first mass 
produced embedded  system.  
5. Based on the complexity and performance requirements, embedded systems are classified 
into small -scale, medium -scale and  large -scale/complex.  
6. The presences of embedded system vary from simple electronic system toys to complex 
flight and missile control  systems.  
7. Embedde d systems are designed to serve the purpose of any one or combination of data 
collection/storage/representation, data processing, monitoring, control or application 
specific user  interface.  
8. Wearable devices refer to embedded systems which are incorporated into accessories and 
apparels. It envisions the bonding of embedded technology in our day to day  lives. 
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS  
 
1. Embedded systems  are 
(a) General  Purpose  (b) Special  Purpose  
2. Embedded system  is 
(a) An electronic  system  (b) A pure mechanical  system 
(c)An electro -mechanical system (d) (a) or  (c) 
3. Which of the following is not true about embedded  systems?  
(a) Built around  specialized  hardware  (b) Always  contain  an operating  system 
(c)Execution behavior may be deterministic (d) All of these (e) none of  these  
4. Which of the following is not an example of small scale embedded  system?  
(a) Electronic  Barbie  doll (b) Simple  calculator  
(c) Cell  Phone  (d) Electronic toy car 
 
 


--- Page 26 ---
[Dept of ECE, MRCET]  Page 20 ESD UNIT -1 NOTES  
 
 
 
 
5. The first recognized modern embedded system  is 
(a) Apple  computer  (b) Apollo Guidance  Computer  
(c) Calculator  (d) Radio navigation  system  
6. The first mass produced embedded system  is 
(a) Minuteman -I (b) Minuteman -II 
(c) Autonetics  D17 (d) Apollo Guidance  Computer  
7. Which of the following is (are) an intended purpose of embedded  systems?  
(a) Data  collection  (b) Data  processing  
(c) Data  communication  (d) All  of these  (e) None of  these  
8. Which of the following is an example of an embedded system for data  communication?  
 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
10. Which of the following is an example of an embedded system for signal  processing?  
(a) Apple  iPOD  (b) Sandisk USB mass storage  device  
(c) both a  and b (d) None of  these  
 
 
Reference Text Books: - 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw  Hill 
2. Computers as Components –Wayne Wolf -morgan Kaufmann  publications  
(a) USB mass storage device  (b) Network router  (c) Digital camera  
(d)Music player  (e) All of these  (f) None of these  
A digital multimeter is an example of embedded system for  
(a) Data communication  (b) Monitoring  (c) Control  
(d) All of these  (e) None of these   
 

--- Page 27 ---
IV ECE  
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN  
UNIT -II 
TYPICAL EMBEDDED 
SYSTEM  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N.SURESH  
Department of ECE   
 
 

--- Page 28 ---
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
ELEMENTS OF EMBEDDED SYSTEMS : 
 
An embedded system is a combination of 3 things, Hardware Softw are Mechanical 
Components and it is supposed to do one specific task only. A typical embedded system contains 
a single chip controller which acts as the master brain of the system. Diagrammatically an 
embedded system can be represented as follows:  
 
 
FPGA/ ASIC/DSP/SoC  
Microprocessor/controller  Embedded  
Firmware  
 
 
 
Memory  
 
 
 
 
 
Communication Interface  
 
 System   
I/p Ports  Core  O/p Ports  (Sensors)   
 (Actuators)    
 
 
 
Other supporting   
Integrated Circuits &   
subsystems  
 
Embedded System  
 
Real World  
 
 
Embed ded systems are basically designed to regulate a physical variable (such 
Microwave Oven) or to manipulate the state of some devices by sending some signals to the 
actuators or devices connected to the output port system (such as temperature in Air 
Conditio ner), in response to the input signal provided by the end users or sensors which are 
connected to the input ports. Hence the embedded systems can be viewed as a reactive  
system.  
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 1  

--- Page 29 ---
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
The cont rol is achieved by processing the information coming from the sensors and user 
interfaces and controlling some actuators that regulate the physical variable.  
 
Keyboards, push button, switches, etc. are Examples of common user interface input 
devices and LE Ds, LCDs, Piezoelectric buzzers, etc examples for common user interface 
output devices  for a typical embedded system. The requirement of type of user interface 
changes from application to application based on domain.  
 
Some embedded systems do not require a ny manual intervention for their operation. 
They automatically sense the input parameters from real world through sensors which are 
connected at input port. The sensor information is passed to the processor after signal 
conditioning and digitization. The c ore of the system performs some predefined operations 
on input data with the help of embedded firmware in the system and sends some actuating 
signals to the actuator connect connected to the output port of the system.  
 
The memory of the system is responsib le for holding the code (control algorithm and 
other important configuration details). There are two types of memories are used in any 
embedded system. Fixed memory (ROM) is used for storing code or program. The user 
cannot change the firmware in this type  of memory. The most common types of memories  
 
used in embedded systems for control algorithm storage are 
OTP,PROM,UVEPROM,EEPROM and FLASH  
 
An embedded system without code (i.e. the control algorithm) implemented memory has 
all the peripherals but is not capable of making decisions depending on the situational as well 
as real world changes.  
 
Memory for implementing the code may be present on the processor or may be 
implemented as a separate chip interfacing the processor  
 
In a controller based embedded sys tem, the controller may contain internal memory for 
storing code such controllers are called Micro -controllers with on -chip ROM, eg. Atmel 
AT89C51.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 2  

--- Page 30 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
The Core of the Embedded Systems: The core of the embedded system falls into any one 
of the following categories.  
 
 General Purpose and Domain Specific Processors 
o Microprocessors

o  Microcontrollers  
o  Digital Signal Processors  
 Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs)

 Application Specific Int egrated Circuits (ASICs)

 Commercial off the shelf Components (COTS)
  
GENERAL  PURPOSE  AND  DOMAIN  SPECIFIC PROCESSOR : 
 
Almost 80% of the embedded systems are processor/ controller based.   
The processor may be microprocessor or a microcontroller or digital  signal processor, 
depending on the domain and application.   
Microprocessor:   
A silicon chip representing a Central Processing Unit (CPU), which is capable of 
performing arithmetic as well as logical operations according to a pre -defined set of 
Instruction s, which is specific to the manufacturer  
 
In general the CPU contains the Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU), Control Unit and 
Working registers  
 
Microprocessor is a dependant unit and it requires the combination of other hardware like 
Memory, Timer Unit, and  Interrupt Controller etc for proper functioning.  
 
Intel claims the credit for developing the first Microprocessor unit Intel 4004, a 4 bit 
processor which was released in Nov 1971  
 
· Developers of microprocessors.   
Intel – Intel 4004 – November 1971(4 -bit) 
Intel – Intel 4040.   
Intel – Intel 8008 – April 1972.  
Intel – Intel 8080 – April 1974(8 -bit).  
Motorola – Motorola 6800.   
Intel – Intel 8085 – 1976.   
Zilog - Z80 – July 1976   
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 3  

--- Page 31 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Microcontroll er:   A highly integrated silicon chip containing a CPU, scratch pad RAM, Special and 
General purpose Register Arrays, On Chip ROM/FLASH memory for program storage, 
Timer and Interrupt control units and dedicated I/O ports 
 Microcontrollers can be considere d as a super set of Microprocessors

 Microcontroller can be general purpose (like Intel 8051, designed for generic applications 
and domains) or application specific (Like Automotive AVR from Atmel Corporation. 
Designed specifically for automotive applicati ons)

 Since a microcontroller contains all the necessary functional blocks for independent working, 
they found greater place in the embedded domain in place of microprocessors 
 Microcontrollers are cheap, cost effective and are readily available in the mar ket

 Texas Instruments TMS 1000 is considered as the world‟s first microcontroller
 
 
Microprocessor Vs Microcontroller:  
 
        
  Microprocessor    Microcontroller   
      
 A silicon chip representing a Central Processing Unit    A  microcontroller  is  a  highly integrated  chip  that   
 (CPU), which is capable of performing arithmetic as    contains  a  CPU,  scratch  pad  RAM,  Special  and   
 well as logical operations according to a pre -defined set    General   purpose   Register   Arrays,   On   Chip   
 of Instructions    ROM/FLASH memory for program storage, Timer   
     and Interrupt control units and dedicated I/O ports   
      
     
 It is a dependent unit. It requires the combination of    It  is  a  self  contained  unit  and  it  doesn’t   requir e  
 other  chips  like  Timers,  Program  and  data  memory    external Interrupt Controller, Timer, UART etc for   
      
 chips, Interrupt controllers etc for functioning    its functioning   
      
 Most  of  the  time  general  purpose  in  design  and    Mostly application oriented or domain specific   
 operation       
      
 Doesn‟t  contain  a  built  in  I/O  port.  The  I/O  Port    Most of the processors contain multiple built -in I/O   
 functionality needs to be implemented with the help of    ports which can be operated as a single 8 or 16 or 32   
 external Programmable Per ipheral Interface Chips like    bit Port or as individual port pins   
       
8255       
     
 Targeted  for  high  end  market  where  performance  is   Targeted for embedded market where performance is   
 important   not so critical (At present this demarc ation is invalid)   
     
 Limited   power   saving   options   compared   to   Includes lot of power saving features   
 microcontrollers      
       
        
        
  N SURESH , Dept. of ECE   Page 4    

--- Page 32 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
General Purpose  Processor (GPP) Vs Application Specific Instruction Set Processor (ASIP)  
 
 General Purpose Processor or GPP is a processor designed for general computational tasks

 GPPs are produced in large volumes and targeting the general market. Due to the high 
volume  production, the per unit cost for a chip is low compared to ASIC or other specific 
ICs

 A typical general purpose processor contains an Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU) and Control 
Unit (CU)

 Application Specific Instruction Set processors (ASIPs) are proc essors with architecture 
and instruction set optimized to specific domain/application requirements like Network 
processing, Automotive, Telecom, media applications, digital signal processing, control 
applications etc.

 ASIPs fill the architectural spectrum  between General Purpose Processors and Application 
Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs)

 The need for an ASIP arises when the traditional general purpose processor are unable to meet the 
increasing application needs

 Some Microcontrollers (like Automotive  AVR, USB AVR from Atmel), System on 
Chips, Digital Signal Processors etc are examples of Application Specific Instruction Set 
Processors (ASIPs)

 ASIPs incorporate a processor and on -chip peripherals, demanded by the application requirement, 
program and d ata memory
 
 
Digital Signal Processors (DSPs):  
 
Powerful special purpose 8/16/32 bit microprocessors designed specifically to meet the 
computational demands and power constraints of today's embedded audio, video, and 
communications applications  
 
Digital S ignal Processors are 2 to 3 times faster than the general purpose microprocessors 
in signal processing applications   
 
DSPs implement algorithms in hardware which speeds up the execution whereas general 
purpose processors implement the algorithm in firmwar e and the speed of execution 
depends primarily on the clock for the processors   
 
DSP can be viewed as a microchip designe d for performing high speed computational 
operations for „addition‟, „subtraction‟, „multiplication‟ and „division‟    
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 5  

--- Page 33 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
A typical Digital Signal Processor incorporates the following key units  
 Program Memory

 Data Memory

 Computational Engine

 I/O Unit
 
 
Audio video signal processing, telecommunication and multimedia applications are 
typical examples where DSP is employed  
 
RISC V/s CISC Processors/Controllers:  
 
 
 
      
 RISC    CISC   
      
 Lesser no. of instructions    Greater no. of Instructions   
      
      
 Instruction  Pipelining  and  increased  execution    Generally no instruction pipelining feature   
 speed      
     
 Orthogonal Instruction Set (Allows each instruction    Non Ortho gonal Instruction Set (All instructions   
 to operate on any register and use any addressing    are not allowed to operate on any register and   
 mode)    use  any  addressing  mode.  It  is  instruction   
    specific)   
     
      
 Operations  are  perf ormed  on  registers  only,  the    Operations  are  performed  on  registers  or   
 only memory operations are load and store    memory depending on the instruction   
      
 Large number of registers are available    Limited no. of general purpose registers   
      
 Programmer needs to write more code to execute a    .  A  programmer  can  achieve  the  desired   
 task since the instructions are simpler ones    functionality with a single instruction which in   
    turn provides the  effect of using more simp ler  
     
    single instructions in RISC   
      
 Single, Fixed length Instructions    Variable length Instructions   
      
 Less Silicon usage and pin count    More  silicon  usage  since  more  additional   
    decoder  logic  is  required  to  imple ment  the   
     
    complex instruction decoding.   
      
 With Harvard Architecture    Can be Harvard or Von -Neumann Architecture   
       
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 6  

--- Page 34 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Harvard V/s Von -Neumann Processor/Controll er Architecture   
 
The terms Harvard and Von -Neumann refers to the processor architecture design.   
 
Microprocessors/controllers based on the 
common bus for fetching both instructions 
stored in a common main memory    
Von-Neumann architecture  shares a s ingle  
and data. Program instructions and data are  
 
Microprocessors/controllers based on the Harvard  architecture will have separate data 
bus and instruction bus. This allows the data transfer and program fetching to occur 
simultaneously on both buses  
 
With Harvard architecture, the data memory can be read and written while the program 
memory is being accessed. These separated data memory and code memory buses allow 
one instruction to execute while the next instruction is fetched (“Pre -fetching”)  
 
I/O  
 CPU   
 Memory   
   
         
          
 Program      CPU   Data Memory   Memory      
        
          
           
Single shared Bus  
 
 
 
Harvard V/s Von -Neumann Processor/Controller Architecture:  
 
      
 Harvard Architecture    Von-Neumann Architectur e  
      
 Separate buses for Instruction and Data fetching    Single shared bus for Instruction and Data   
    fetching   
     
     
 Easier to Pipeline, so high performance can be    Low performance Compared to Harvard   
 achieved    Architecture   
 Comp aratively high cost    Cheaper   
      
 No memory alignment problems    Allows self modifying codes†  
      
 Since data memory and program memory are    Since data memory and program memory   
      
stored physically in different locations, no    are stored  physically in same chip, chances   
chances for accidental corruption of program    for accidental corruption of program   
memory    memory   
       
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 7  

--- Page 35 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Big-endian V/s Little -endian processor s: 
 
 Endianness specifies the order in which the data is stored in the memory by processor 
operations in a multi byte system (Processors whose word size is greater than one byte). 
Suppose the word length is two byte then data can be stored in memory in two different 
ways
 
 
Higher order of data byte at the higher memory and lower order of data byte at 
location just below the higher memory  
 
Lower order of data byte at the higher memory and higher order of data byte at 
location just below the higher memory  
 
 Little-endian means the lower -order byte of the data is stored in memory at the lowest  
address, and the higher -order byte at the highest address. (The little end comes first)

 Big-endian means the higher -order byte of the data is stored in memory at the lowe st address, 
and the lower -order byte at the highest address. (The big end comes first.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 8  

--- Page 36 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Load Store Operation & Instruction Pipelining:  
 
The RISC processor  instruction set is orthogonal and it operates on registers. The memory access 
related operations are performed by the special instructions load and store . If the operand is 
specified as memory location, the content of it is loaded to a register using the load instruction. 
The instruction store  stores data from a specified register to a specified memory location   
 
 
 
Instruction Pipelining  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The conventional instruction execution by the processor follows the fetch -decode -
execute sequence  
 
The „f etch‟ part fetches the instruction from program memory or code memory and 
the decode part decodes the instruction to generate the necessary control signals   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The execute stage reads the operands, perform ALU operations and stores the res ult. 
In conventional program execution, the fetch and decode operations are performed in 
sequence   
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 9  

--- Page 37 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
During the decode operation the memory address bus is available and if it possible to 
effectively utilize it for an instruction fetch, the processing speed can be increased   
 
In its simplest form instruction pipelining refers to the overlapped execution of 
instructions  
 
Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC):   
 
A microchip designed t o perform a specific or unique application. It is used as 
replacement to conventional general purpose logic chips.  
 
ASIC integrates several functions into a single chip and thereby reduces the system 
development cost  
 
Most of the ASICs are proprietary prod ucts. As a single chip, ASIC consumes very small 
area in the total system and thereby helps in the design of smaller systems with high 
capabilities/functionalities.  
 
ASICs can be pre -fabricated for a special application or it can be custom fabricated by 
using the components from a re -usable „ building block ‟ library of components for a 
particular customer application  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fabrication of ASICs requires a non -refundable initial investment (Non Recurring 
Engineering (NRE) charges) for the process tech nology and configuration expenses  
 
If the Non -Recurring Engineering Charges (NRE) is born by a third party and the 
Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) is made openly available in the market, 
the ASIC is referred as Application Specific Standard Product (ASSP)   
 
The ASSP is marketed to multiple customers just as a general -purpose product , but to a 
smaller number of customers since it is for a specific application.    
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 10  

--- Page 38 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Some ASICs are proprietary products , the developers are not interested in revealing the 
internal details.  
 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs):  
 
 Logic devices provide specific functions, including device -to-device interfacing, data 
communication, signal processing, da ta display, timing and control operations, and 
almost every other function a system must perform.

 Logic devices can be classified into two broad categories - Fixed and Programmable. The 
circuits in a fixed logic device are permanent, they perform one func tion or set of 
functions - once manufactured, they cannot be changed

 Programmable logic devices (PLDs) offer customers a wide range of logic capacity, 
features, speed, and voltage characteristics - and these devices can be re -configured to 
perform any num ber of functions at any time

 Designers can use inexpensive software tools to quickly develop, simulate, and test their 
logic designs in PLD based design. The design can be quickly programmed into a device, 
and immediately tested in a live circuit

 PLDs ar e based on re -writable memory technology and the device is reprogrammed to 
change the design
 
 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs) – CPLDs and FPGA  
 
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and Complex Programmable Logic Devices 
(CPLDs) are the two major type s of programmable logic devices  
 
FPGA:  
 
FPGA is an IC designed to be configured by a designer after manufacturing.  
 
FPGAs offer the highest amount of logic density, the most features, and the highest 
performance.   
 
Logic gate is Medium to high density ran ging from 1K to 500K  system gates    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 11  

--- Page 39 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
These advanced FPGA devices also offer features such as built -in hardwired processors 
(such as the IBM Power PC), substantial amounts of memory, clock management 
systems, and support for many of the latest, very fast device -to-device signaling 
technologies   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: FPGA Architecture  
 
These advanced FPGA devices also offer features such as built -in hardwired processors, 
substan tial amounts of memory, clock management systems, and support for many of the 
latest, very fast device -to-device signaling technologies.  
 
FPGAs are used in a wide variety of applications ranging from data processing and 
storage, to instrumentation, telecom munications, and digital signal processing  
 
CPLD:  
 
 A complex programmable logic device  (CPLD ) is a programmable logic device with 
complexity between that of PALs and FPGAs, and architectural features of both.
 
CPLDs, by contrast, offer much smaller amounts  of logic - up to about 10,000 gates.   
 
CPLDs offer very predictable timing characteristics and are therefore ideal for critical 
control applications.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 12  

--- Page 40 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPLDs such  as the Xilinx CoolRunner  series also require extremely low amounts of 
power and are very inexpensive, making them ideal for cost -sensitive, battery -operated, 
portable applications such as mobile phones and digital handheld assistants.  
 
ADVANTAGES OF PLDs:  
 
• PLDs offer customer much more flexibility during design cycle  
 
• PLDSs do not require long lead times for prototype or production -the PLDs are already 
on a distributor‟s self and ready for shipment  
 
• PLDs do not require customers to pay for large NRE costs and purchase expensive mask 
sets 
 
• PLDs allow customers to order just the number of parts required when they need them. 
allowing them to control inventory.  
 
• PLDs are reprogrammable even after a piece of equipment is shipped to a customer.  
 
• The manufacturers  able to add new features or upgrade the PLD based products that are 
in the field by uploading new programming file  
 
Commercial off the Shelf Component (COTS):   
 
A Commercial off -the-shelf (COTS) product is one which is used „ as-is‟  
 
COTS products are designed in such a way to provide easy integration and 
interoperability with existing system components    
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 13  

--- Page 41 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Typical examples for the COTS hardware unit are Remote Con trolled Toy Car control 
unit including the RF Circuitry part, High performance, high frequency microwave 
electronics (2 to 200 GHz), High bandwidth analog -to-digital converters, Devices and 
components for operation at very high temperatures, Electro -optic IR imaging arrays, 
UV/IR Detectors etc   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A COTS component in turn contains a General Purpose Processor (GPP) or Application 
Specific Instruction Set Processor (ASIP) or Application Specific Integrated Chip 
(ASIC)/Application Specific Sta ndard Product (ASSP) or Programmable Logic Device 
(PLD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The major advantage of using COTS is that they are readily available in the market, 
cheap and a developer can cut down his/her development time to a great extend.   
 
There is no need t o design the module yourself and write the firmware .   
 
Everything will be readily supplied by the COTs manufacturer.   
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 14  

--- Page 42 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
The major problem faced by the end -user is that there are no opera tional and 
manufacturing standards.   
 
The major drawback of using COTs component in embedded design is that the 
manufacturer may withdraw the product or discontinue the production of the COTs at any 
time if rapid change in technology   
 
This problem adver sely affect a commercial manufacturer of the embedded system which 
makes use of the specific COTs  
 
Memory:  
 
Memory is an important part of an embedded system. The memory used in embedded 
system can be either Program Storage Memory (ROM) or Data memory (RAM ) 
 
Certain Embedded processors/controllers contain built in program memory and data 
memory and this memory is known as on -chip memory  
 
Certain Embedded processors/controllers do not contain sufficient memory inside the 
chip and requires external memory cal led off-chip memory or external memory.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memory – Program Storage Memory:  
 Stores the program instructions

 Retains its contents even after the power to it is turned off. It is generally known as Non 
volatile storage memory

 Depending on the fa brication, erasing and programming techniques they are classified into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 15  

--- Page 43 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
FLASH   
 
 
 
Code Memory   
(ROM)   
 
 
 
NVRAM  
 
 
 
 
 
PROM  Masked ROM  
EPROM  EEPROM  (OTP)  (MROM)    
 
 
1. Masked ROM (MROM):  
 
One-time programmable memory.  
 
Uses hardwired technology for storing data.  
 
The device is factory programmed by masking and metallization process according to 
the data provided by the end user.  
 
The primary advantage of MROM is low cost for high v olume production.  
 
MROM is the least expensive type of solid state memory.  
 
Different mechanisms are used for the masking process of the ROM, like  
 Creation of an enhancement or depletion mode transistor through channel implant

 By creating the memory cell either using a standard transistor or a high threshold 
transistor.

 In the high threshold mode, the supply voltage required to turn ON the transistor is 
above the normal ROM IC operating voltage.

 This ensures that the transistor is always off and the memo ry cell stores always logic 
0.
 
The limitation with MROM based firmware storage is the inability to modify the 
device firmware against firmware upgrades.   
 
The MROM is permanent in bit storage, it is not possible to alter the bit information   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 16  

--- Page 44 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
2. Programmable Read Only Memory (PROM) / (OTP) :  
 
  It is not pre -programmed by the manufacturer  
 
  The end user is responsible for Programming these devices.   
 
PROM/OTP has nichrome  or polysil icon wires arranged in a matrix, these wires can be 
functionally viewed as fuses.   
 
It is programmed by a PROM programmer which selectively burns the fuses according to 
the bit pattern to be stored.  
 
Fuses which are not blown/burned represents a logic “1”  where as fuses which are 
blown/burned represents a logic “0”.The default state is logic “1”.  
 
OTP is widely used for commercial production of embedded systems whose proto -typed 
versions are proven and the code is finalized.  
 
It is a low cost solution for commercial production.  
 
OTPs cannot be reprogrammed.  
 
3. Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory (EPROM):  
 
Erasable Programmable Read Only (EPROM) memory gives the flexibility to re -program 
the same chip.  
 
During development phase , code is subject to conti nuous changes and using an OTP is 
not economical.  
 
EPROM stores the bit information by charging the floating gate of an FET  
 
Bit information is stored by using an EPROM Programmer, which applies high voltage to 
charge the floating gate  
 
EPROM contains a qu artz crystal window for erasing the stored information. If the 
window is exposed to Ultra violet rays for a fixed duration, the entire memory will be 
erased   
 
Even though the EPROM chip is flexible in terms of re -programmability, it needs to be 
taken out of the circuit board and needs to be put in a UV eraser device for 20 to 30 
minutes   
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 17  

--- Page 45 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
4. Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory  (EEPROM):   
 
Erasable Programmable Read Only (E PROM) memory gives the flexibility to re -program 
the same chip using electrical signals   
 
The information contained in the EEPROM memory can be altered by using electrical 
signals at the register/Byte level   
 
They can be erased and reprogrammed within th e circuit  
 
These chips include a chip erase mode and in this mode they can be erased in a few 
milliseconds  
 
It provides greater flexibility for system design  
 
The only limitation is their capacity is limited when compared with the standard ROM (A 
few kilob ytes).  
 
5. Program Storage Memory – FLASH  
 
FLASH memory is a variation of EEPROM technology.  
 
FALSH is the latest ROM technology and is the most popular ROM technology used in 
today‟s embedded designs  
 
It combines the re -programmability of EEPROM and the h igh capacity of standard 
ROMs  
 
FLASH memory is organized as sectors (blocks) or pages  
 
FLASH memory stores information in an array of floating gate MOSFET transistors  
 
The erasing of memory can be done at sector level or page level without affecting the 
other sectors or pages  
 
Each sector/page should be erased before re -programming   
 
The typical erasable capacity of FLASH is of the order of a few 1000 cycles.  
 
Read -Write Memory/Random Access Memory (RAM)  
 RAM is the data memory or working memory of the cont roller/processor

 RAM is volatile, meaning when the power is turned off, all the contents are destroyed
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 18  

--- Page 46 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
 RAM is a direct access memory, meaning we can access the desired memory location 
directly without the need for traversing through the entire memory locations to reach the 
desired memory position (i.e. Random Access of memory location)
 
 
 
 
Read/Write   
Memory (RAM)  
 
 
 
 
 
SRAM  DRAM  NVRAM  
 
1. Static RAM (SRAM):  
 Static RAM stores data in the for m of Voltage.

 They are made up of flip -flops

 In typical implementation, an SRAM cell (bit) is realized using 
6 transistors (or 6 MOSFETs).

 Four of the transistors are used for building the latch (flip -flop) 
part of the memory cell and 2 for controlling the access. 
 Static RAM is the fastest form of RAM available.

 SRAM is fast in operation due to its resistive networking and switching capabilities

2. Dynamic RAM (DRAM)  
 
 Dynamic RAM stores data in the form of charge. They are made up of MOS transistor gates

 The advantages of DRAM are its high density and low cost compared to 
SRAM

 The disadvantage is that since the information is stored as charge it 
gets leaked off with time and to prevent this they need to be 
refreshed periodically

 Special circuits called  DRAM controllers are used for the refreshing operation. The refresh 
operation is done periodically in milliseconds interval
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 19  

--- Page 47 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
SRAM Vs DRAM:  
 
SRAM Cell   DRAM Cell  
    
Made up of 6 CMOS tr ansistors (MOSFET)   Made up of a MOSFET and a capacitor  
    
Doesn‟t Require refreshing   Requires refreshing  
   
Low capacity (Less dense)   High Capacity (Highly dense)   
    
More expensive   Less Expensive   
    
Fast in operation. Typical access time i s 10ns   Slow   in   operation   due   to   refresh   
  requirements. Typical access time is 60ns.   
  
  Write operation is faster than read operation.   
     
 
 
3. Non Volatile RAM (NVRAM):  
 Random access memory with battery backup

 It contains Static RAM based memory and a minute battery for providing supply to the 
memory in the absence of external power supply 
 The memory and battery are packed together in a single package

 NVRAM is used for the non volatile storage of results of operations or for setting  up of flags 
etc 
 The life span of NVRAM is expected to be around 10 years

 DS1744 from Maxim/Dallas is an example for 32KB NVRAM
 
Memory selection for Embedded Systems:  
 
• Selection of suitable memory is very much essential step in high performance 
applicat ions, because the challenges and limitations of the system performance are often 
decided upon the type of memory architecture.  
 
• Systems memory requirement depend primarily on the nature of the application that is 
planned to run on the system.  
 
• Memory perfo rmance and capacity requirement for low cost systems are small, whereas 
memory throughput can be the most critical requirement in a complex, high performance 
system.   
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 20  

--- Page 48 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
• Following are the fac tors that are to be considered while selecting the memory devices,  
 Speed

 Data storage size and capacity

 Bus width

 Power consumption

 Cost
 
 
Embedded system require ments : 
 
 Program memory for holding control algorithm or embedded OS and the applications 
designed to run on top of OS. 
 Data memory for holding variables and temporary data during task execution.

 Memory for holding non -volatile data which are modifiable by the application.
 
The memory requirement for an embedded system in terms of RAM (SRAM/D RAM) 
and ROM (EEPROM/FLASH/NVRAM) is solely dependent on the type of the embedded 
system and applications for which it is designed.  
 
There is no hard and fast rule for calculating the memory requirements.  
 
Lot of factors need to be considered for selecting  the type and size of memory for 
embedded system.  
 
Example: Design of Embedded based electronic Toy.  
 
SOC or microcontroller can be selected based type(RAM &ROM) and size of on -chip 
memory for the design of embedded system.  
 
If on -chip memory is not suffic ient then how much external memory need to be 
interfaced.   
 
If the ES design is RTOS based ,the RTOS requires certain amount of RAM for its 
execution and ROM for storing RTOS Image.   
 
The RTOS suppliers gives amount of run time RAM requirements and progr am memory 
requirements for the RTOS.   
 
Additional memory is required for executing user tasks and user applications.    
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 21  

--- Page 49 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
On a safer side, always add a buffer value to the total estimated RA M and ROM 
requirements.   
 
A smart phone device with windows OS is typical example for embedded device requires 
say 512MB RAM and 1GB ROM are minimum requirements for running the mobile 
device.   
 
And additional RAM &ROM memory is required for running user  applications.  
 
So estimate the memory requirements for install and run the user applications without 
facing memory space.  
 
Memory can be selected based on size of the memory ,data bus and address bus size of 
the processor/controller.  
 
Memory chips are ava ilable in standard sizes like 512 bytes,1KB,2KB ,4KB,8KB,16 KB 
….1MB etc.  
 
FLASH memory is the popular choice for ROM in embedded applications .  
 
It is powerful and cost -effective solid state storage technology for mobile electronic 
devices and other consu mer applications.  
 
Flash memory available in two major variants  
 
1. NAND FLASH  2. NOR FLASH  
 
NAND FLASH is a high density low cost non -volatile storage memory . 
 
NOR FLASH is less dense and slightly expensive but supports Execute in place(XIP).  
 
The XIP tec hnology allows the execution of code memory from ROM itself without the 
need for copying it to the RAM.  
 
The EEPROM is available as either serial interface or parallel interface chip.  
 
If the processor/controller of the device supports serial interface and  the amount of data 
to write and read to and from the device (Serial EEPROM) is less.   
 
The serial EEPROM saves the address space of the total system.   
 
The memory capacity of the serial EEPROM is expressed in bits or Kilobits.    
 
N SURESH , Dept. of EC E Page 22  

--- Page 50 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Industrial grade memory chips are used in certain embedded devices may be operated at 
extreme environmental conditions like high temperature.  
 
Sensors & Actuators:  
 
• Embedded system is in constant interaction wit h the real world  
 
• Controlling/monitoring functions executed by the embedded system is achieved in 
accordance with the changes happening to the Real World.  
 
• The changes in the system environment or variables are detected by the sensors 
connected to the inpu t port of the embedded system.  
 
• If the embedded system is designed for any controlling purpose, the system will produce 
some changes in controlling variable to bring the controlled variable to the desired value.  
 
• It is achieved through an actuator connecte d to the out port of the embedded system.   
 
Sensor:   
A transducer device which converts energy from one form to another for any 
measurement or control purpose. Sensors acts as input device  
 
Eg. Hall Effect Sensor which measures the distance between the cu shion and magnet in 
the Smart Running shoes from adidas  
 
Example: IR, humidity , PIR(passive infra red) , ultrasonic , piezoelectric , smoke 
sensors   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 23  

--- Page 51 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
Actuator:   
 
A form of transducer device (mechanical or 
electrical) which converts signals to 
corresponding physical action (motion). 
Actuator acts as an output device  
 
Eg. Micro motor actuator which adjusts the 
position of the cushioning element in the 
Smart Running shoe s from adidas   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 24  

--- Page 52 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
The I/O Subsystem:  
 
 The I/O subsystem of the embedded system facilitates the interaction of the 
embedded system with external wo rld

 The interaction happens through the sensors and actuators connected to the 
Input and output ports respectively of the embedded system

 The sensors may not be directly interfaced to the Input ports, instead 
they may be interfaced through signal conditi oning and translating 
systems like ADC, Optocouplers etc

1. I/O Devices - Light Emitting Diode (LED):    
Light  Emitting  Diode   (LED)  is  an  output  device  for  visual   Vcc  
     
     
indication in any embedded system  
R 
 
LED can be used as an  indicator for the status of various signals       
     
or situations.       
Typical examples are indicating the presence of power conditions      
GND      
like „Device ON‟, „Battery low‟ or „Charging of battery‟ for a      
     
battery operated han dheld embedded devices       
 
LED is a p -n junction diode and it contains an anode and a cathode.  
 
For proper functioning of the LED, the anode of it should be connected to +ve terminal 
of the supply voltage and cathode to the –ve terminal of supply voltag e 
 
The current flowing through the LED must limited to a value below the maximum current 
that it can conduct.  
 
A resister is used in series between the power supply and the resistor to limit the current 
through the LED  
 
2. I/O Devices – 7-Segment LED Display   
 
The 7 – segment LED display is an output device for displaying alpha numeric characters   
 
It contains 8 light -emitting diode (LED) segments arranged in a special form. Out of the 8 
LED segments, 7 are used for displaying alpha numeric characters    
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 25  

--- Page 53 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
The LED segments are named A to G and the decimal point LED segment is named as 
DP  
 
The LED Segments A to G and DP should be lit accordingly to display numbers and 
characters   
 
The 7 – segment LED displays are available in two different configurations, namely; 
Common anode and Common cathode   
 
In the Common anode configuration, the anodes of the 8 segments are connected 
commonly whereas in the Common cathode configuration, the 8 LED segme nts share a 
common cathode line  
 
Based on the configuration of the 7 – segment LED unit, the LED segment anode or 
cathode is connected to the Port of the processor/controller in the order „A‟ segment to 
the Least significant port Pin and DP segment to the most significant Port Pin.  
 
The current flow through each of the LED s egments should be limited to the maximum 
value supported by the LED display unit  
 
Anode  Common Cathode LED Display   
 DP GFEDCB  A    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
  DPGF  ED C B  A              
    Common Anode LED Display                Cathode  
 
 
 
The typical value for the current falls within the range of 20mA  
 
The current through each segment can be limited by connecting a current limiting resistor 
to the anode or cathode of each segment  
 
3. I/O Devices – Optocoupler   
 
Optocoupler is a solid state device to isolate two parts of a circuit.   
 
Optocoupler combines an LED and a photo -transistor in a single housing (package)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 26  

--- Page 54 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
In electronic circuits, optocoupler is used for suppressing interference in data 
communication, circuit isolation, High voltage separation, simultaneous separation and   
intensification  signal etc  Vcc  
LED  AT89C51  LED  
 
I/p interface  Port Pin  O/p interface   
 Port Pin    
Photo -transistor   Photo -transistor  
Opto -Coupler  Microcontroller  Opto -Coupler  
IC MCT2M   IC MCT2M   
 
 
 
 
Optocouplers can be used in either input circuits or i n output circuits  
 
4. I/O Devices – Stepper Motor : 
 
Stepper motor is an electro mechanical device which generates discrete 
displacement (motion) in response to dc electrical signals  
 
It differs from the normal dc motor in its operation. The dc motor produces 
continuous rotation on applying dc voltage whereas a stepper motor produces discrete 
rotation in response to the dc voltage applied to it  
 
Stepper motors are widely used in industrial embedded 
applications, consumer electronic products and robotics 
contro l systems  
 
The paper feed mechanism of a printer/fax makes use 
of stepper motors for its functioning.  
 
Based on the coil winding arrangements, a two phase 
stepper motor is classified into   
 
 
 
 
GND   
 
A 
  
M   
  
 
C 
 
B 
  D  
GND  
 
 
 Unipolar

 Bipolar
 
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 27  

--- Page 55 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
 Unipolar: A unipolar stepper motor contains two windings per phase. The direction of  
rotation (clockwise or anticlockwise) of a stepper motor is controlled by changing the 
direction of current  flow. Current in one direction flows through one coil and in the 
opposite direction flows through the other coil. It is easy to shift the direction of rotation 
by just switching the terminals to which the coils are connected

 Bipolar: A bipolar stepper mo tor contains single winding per phase. For reversing the  
motor rotation the current flow through the windings is reversed dynamically. It requires 
complex circuitry for current flow reversal

5. The I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices – Relay :  
 An electro mechanical  device which acts as dynamic path selectors for signals and power.

 The „Relay‟ unit contains a relay coil made up of insulated wire on a metal core and a metal 
armature with one or more contacts. 
 „Relay‟ works on electromagnetic principle.

 When a voltage is applied to the relay coil, current flows through the coil, whic h in turn 
generates a magnetic field.
 
 
 CoilR
elay C
oi
l
R
el
a
y Coil
Relay  
Single Pole Single  Single Pole Single  Single Pole Double  
Throw Normally  Throw Normally  Throw  
Open  Closed     The magnetic field attracts the armature core and moves the contact point .

 The movement of the contact point changes the power/signal flow path.

 The Relay is normally controlled using a relay driver circuit connected to the port pin of the 
processor/controller

 A transistor can be used as the relay driver. The transistor can be selected depending on the 
relay driving current requirements.
  
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 28  

--- Page 56 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
6. The I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices -Piezo Buzzer:  
 
• It is a piezoelectric device for generating audio indications in embedded  applications.  
 
• A Piezo buzzer contains a piezoelectric diaphragm which produces audible sound in 
response to the voltage applied to it.  
 
• Piezoelectric buzzers are available in two types   
 
1.Self -driving  2.External driving  
 
• Self-driving contains are the n ecessary components to 
generate sound at a predefined tone.  
 
• External driving piezo Buzzers supports the generation of different tones.  
 
• The tone can be varied by applying a variable pulse train to the piezoelectric buzzer.  
 
• A Piezo Buzzer can be directly interfaced to the port pin of the processor/Controller.  
 
7. The I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices – Push button switch:  
 Push Button switch is an input device.

 Push button switch comes in two configurations, namely „Push to Make‟ 
and „Push to Break‟

 The switch is normally in the open state and it makes a circuit contact when 
it is pushed or pressed in the „Push to Make‟ configuration.
 
 
 In the „Push to Break‟  configuration, the switch 
normally in the closed state and it breaks the 
circuit contact when it is pushed or pressed   
 
is 
 
 The push button stays in the „closed‟ (For Push 
to Make type) or „open‟ (For Push to Break 
type) state as long as it is kept in t he pushed 
state and it breaks/makes the circuit connection 
when it is released. 
 Push button is used for generating a momentary pulse
 
 
 
 
N SURESH , Dept. of ECE  Page 29  
 
 

--- Page 57 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
  
 
 
 

--- Page 58 ---
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
N SURESH, Dept. of ECE  Page 3 1

--- Page 59 ---
 
 
 
 
 
MRCET ECE  ES UNIT -2 Notes   
 
 
 
 
 
Text Book: - 
 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill  
 
   
 
N SURESH, Dept. of ECE  Page 3 2 
 

--- Page 60 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 1 
         EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN  
                                          IV YEAR ECE (R15)  
                                 UNIT -III 
 COMMUNICATION INTERFACE  
 
N.SURESH  
Department of ECE  
 
 


--- Page 61 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 2 
 
Communication Interface:  
• Communication interface is essential for  communicating with various subsystems of the 
embedded system and with the external world  
 
• The communication interface can be viewed in two different perspectives; namely;  
 
1. Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication Interface)  
 
2. Product level communication interface (External Communication Interface)  
 
1. Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication Interface):  
The communication channel which interconnects the various components within an 
embedded product is referred as Device/board level communication interface (Onboard 
Communication Interface)  
 
 Examples: Serial interfaces like I2C, SPI, UART,  1-Wire etc and Parallel bus interface  
 
2. Product level communication interface (External Communication Interface):  
 
The „Product level communication interface‟ (External Communication Interface) is 
responsible for data transfer between the embedded system and other devices or modules . The 
external communication interface can be either wired media or wireless media and it c an be a 
serial or parallel interface.  
 Examples for wireless communication interface: Infrared (IR), Bluetooth (BT), Wireless 
LAN (Wi -Fi), Radio Frequency waves (RF), GPRS etc.  
 Examples for wired interfaces: RS -232C/RS -422/RS 485, USB, Ethernet (TCP -IP), IE EE 
1394 port, Parallel port etc.  
 
 
 

--- Page 62 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 3 
  
 
1. Device/board level or On board communication interfaces: The  
Communication channel which interconnects the various components within an embedded 
product is referred as Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication 
Interface)  
These are classified into  
1.1 I2C (Inter Integrated Circuit)  Bus 
1.2 SPI ( Serial Peripheral Interface) Bus  
1.3 UART ( Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)  
1.4 1-Wires  Interface  
1.5 Parallel Interface  
 
1 I2C (Inter I ntegrated Circuit) Bus:  
Inter Integrated Circuit Bus (I2C - Pronounced „I square C‟) is a synchronous bi -directional half 
duplex (one -directional communication at a given point of time) two wire serial interface 
bus.The concept of I2C bus was developed by „Philips Semiconductors‟ in the early 1980‟s.  The 
original intention of I2C was to provide an easy way of connection between a 
microprocessor/microcontroller system and the peripheral chips in Television sets. 


--- Page 63 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 4 
 The I2C bus is comprised of two bus lines, nam ely; Serial Clock – SCL and Serial Data – SDA.  
 
 
 
 
SCL line is responsible for generating synchronization clock pulses and SDA is 
responsible for transmitting the serial data across devices.I2C bus is a shared bus system to 
which many number of I2C devices can be connected. Devices connected to the I2C bus can act 
as either „Master‟ device or „Slave‟ device . 
 The „Master‟ device is responsible for controlling the communication by 
initiating/terminating data transfer, sending data and generating neces sary synchronization clock 
pulses.


--- Page 64 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 5 
  Slave devices wait for the commands from the master and respond upon receiving the 
commands. Master and „Slave‟ devices can act as either transmitter or receiver. Regardless 
whether a master is acting as transmitter or r eceiver, the synchronization clock signal is 
generated by the „Master‟ device only.I2C supports multi masters on the same bus.
The sequence of operation for communicating with an I2C slave device is:  
1. Master device pulls the clock line (SCL) of the bus to „ HIGH‟  
2. Master device pulls the data line (SDA) „LOW‟, when the SCL line is at logic 
„HIGH‟ (This is the „Start‟ condition for data transfer)  

3. Master sends the address (7 bit or 10 bit wide) of the „Slave‟ device to which it wants to 
communicate, over the SDA line.  
4. Clock pulses are generated at the SCL line for synchronizing the bit reception by the 
slave device.  
5. The MSB of the data is always transmitted first.  
6. The data in the bus is valid during the „HIGH‟ period of the clock signal  
7. In normal data transfer, the data line only changes state when the clock is low.  
 
8. Master waits for the acknowledgement bit from the slave device whose address is sent on 
the bus along with the Read/Write operation command.  


--- Page 65 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 6 
 9. Slave devices connected to the bus compares the  address received with the address 
assigned to them  
10. The Slave device with the address requested by the master device responds by sending an 
acknowledge bit (Bit value =1) over the SDA line  
11. Upon receiving the acknowledge bit, master sends the 8bit data to t he slave device over 
SDA line, if the requested operation is „Write to device‟.  
12. If the requested operation is „Read from device‟, the slave device sends data to the 
master over the SDA line.  
13. Master waits for the acknowledgement bit from the device upon byt e transfer complete 
for a write operation and sends an acknowledge bit to the slave device for a read 
operation  
14. Master terminates the transfer by pulling the SDA line „HIGH‟ when the clock line SCL 
is at logic „HIGH‟ (Indicating the „STOP‟ condition).  
 
 


--- Page 66 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 7 
  
1.2 Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus:  
The Serial Peripheral Interface Bus (SPI) is a synchronous bi -directional full duplex four wire 
serial interface bus. The concept of SPI is introduced by Motorola.SPI is a single master multi -
slave system. 
 It is possible to have a system where more than one SPI device can be master, provided 
the condition only one master device is active at any given point of time, is satisfied. 
 SPI is used to send data between Microcontrollers and small peripherals such as shift  
registers, sensors, and SD cards.

SPI requires four signal lines for communication. They are: 
Master Out Slave In (MOSI): Signal line carrying the data from master to slave device.  It is 
also known as Slave Input/Slave Data In (SI/SDI)  
Master In Slave Out (MISO): Signal line carrying the data from slave to master device.  It is 
also known as Slave Output (SO/SDO)  


--- Page 67 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 8 
 Serial Clock (SCLK): Signal line carrying the clock signals  
Slave Select (SS): Signal line for slave device select. It is an ac tive low signal.  
The master device is responsible for generating the clock signal. 
Master device selects the required slave device by asserting the corresponding slave  devices 
slave select signal „LOW‟.  
 The data out line (MISO) of all the slave devices whe n not selected floats at high impedance 
state 
 The serial data transmission through SPI Bus is fully configurable.  
 SPI devices contain certain set of registers for holding these configurations.  
 The Serial Peripheral Control Register holds the various configuration parameters like 
master/slave selection for the device, baudrate selection for communication, clock signal 
control etc.  
 The status register holds the status of various conditions for transmission and reception.SPI 
works on the principle of „Sh ift Register‟.  
 The master and slave devices contain a special shift register for the data to transmit or 
receive.  
 The size of the shift register is device dependent. Normally it is a multiple of 8.  
 
 During transmission from the master to slave, the data i n the master‟s shift register is 
shifted out to the MOSI pin and it enters the shift register of the slave device through the 
MOSI pin of the slave device.  


--- Page 68 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 9 
  At the same time the shifted out data bit from the slave device’s shift register enters the 
shift re gister of the master device through MISO pin  
 
I2C V/S SPI:  
 
 
 


--- Page 69 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 10 
  
1-wire interface (protocol)  
 
1- Wire is a device communications bus system designed by Dallas Semiconductor  Corp. that 
provides low -speed data, signaling, and power over a single  conductor . 
1-Wire is similar in concept to I²C, but with lower data rates and longer range. It is typically used 
to communicate with small inexpensive  devices such as digital  thermometers and weather 
instruments.  
One distinctive feature of the bus is the possibility of using only two wires: data and ground. 
To accomplish this, 1-Wire devices include an 800 pF capacitor to store charge, and to power the 
device during periods when the  data line is  active  
There is always one master  in overall charge, which may be a PC or a microcontroller . 
The master i nitiates activity on the bus, simplifying the avoidance of collisions on the bus. 
Protocols are built into the software to detect collisions. After a collision, the master retries the 
required communication.  
 
Many devices can share the same bus. Each devic e on the bus has a unique 64 -bit serial 
number. The least significant byte  of the serial number is an 8 -bit number that tells the type of  
the device. The most significant byte is a standard  (for the 1 -wire bus) 8 -bit CRC.  
The master starts a transmission with a reset pulse, which pulls the wire to 0 volts for at least 480 
µs. This resets every slave device on the bus. After that, any slave device, if present, shows that 
it exists with a "presence" pulse: it holds the bus low for at least 60 µs after the master releases 
the bus. 


--- Page 70 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 11 
 To send a " 1", the bus maste r sends a very brief (1 – 15 µs) low pulse. To send a "0", the 
master sends a 60 µs low pulse. When receiving data, the master start sends a 1 –15-µs 0-volt 
pulse to slave each bit. If the transmitting does unit wants to send a "1", it to the nothing, and the  
bus goes transmitting pulled -up voltage. If the "0", it pulls slave wants to send the data line to 
ground for 60 µs.  
 
PARALLEL COMMUNICATION:  
 
In data transmission , parallel communication is a method of conveying multiple binary 
digits ( bits) simultaneously. It contrasts with communication. The  communication channel is the  
number of electrical conductors used at the physical layer to convey bits.  
Parallel communication implies more than one such conductor. For example, an 8 -bit 
parallel channel will convey eight bits (or a byte) simultaneously, whereas a serial channel would 
convey those same bits sequentially, one at a time. Parallel communication is and always has 
been widely used within integrated  circuits , in peripheral buses, and in memory devices such as 
RAM . 
 
2. Product   level   communication   interface   (External   Communication   
Interface): The Product level communication interface‟ (External Communication Interface) is 
responsible  for data transfer between the embedded system and other devices or modules  
It is classified into two types  
1. Wired communication interface  
2. Wireless communication interface:   
1. Wired communication interface : Wired communication interface is an interface used t o 
transfer information over a wired network.   


--- Page 71 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 12 
 It is classified into following types.  
1. RS-232C/RS -422/RS 485  
 
2. USB  
 
 
 
 
RS-232C:  
 RS-232 C (Recommended Standard number 232, revision C from the Electronic Industry 
Association) is a legacy, full duplex, wired, asynchronous serial communication interface  
 RS-232 extends the UART communication signals for external data communication.  
 UART uses the standard TTL/CMOS logic (Logic „High‟ corresponds to bit value 1 and 
Logic „LOW‟ corresponds to bit value 0) for bit tr ansmission whereas RS232 use the 
EIA standard for bit transmission.  
 As per EIA standard, a logic „0‟ is represented with voltage between +3 and +25V and a 
logic „1‟ is represented with voltage between -3 and -25V. 
 In EIA standard, logic „0‟ is known as „Sp ace‟ and logic „1‟ as „Mark‟.  
 
The RS232 interface define various handshaking and control signals for communication 
apart from the „Transmit‟ and „Receive‟ signal lines for data communication  


--- Page 72 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 13 
 RS-232 supports two different types of connectors, namely; DB -9: 9-Pin connector and DB -25: 
25-Pin connector.  
 
Fig: DB -25:25 -Pin connector.  
 
 
 
Fig: DB -9:9-Pin connector.  


--- Page 73 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 14 
  
 
 RS-232 is a point -to-point communication interface and the devices involved in RS -232 
communication are called „Data Terminal Equipment (DTE)‟ and „Data Communication 
Equipment (DCE)‟.  
 If no data flow control is required, only TXD and RXD signal lines and ground line (GND) 
are required for data transmission and reception.  
 The RXD pin of DCE should be connected to the TXD pin of DTE and vice versa  for proper 
data transmission . 
 If hardware data flow control is required for serial transmission, various control signal lines 
of the RS -232 connection are used appropriately.  
 The control signals are implemented mainly for modem communication and some of t hem 
may be irrelevant for other type of devices.  
 The Request to Send (RTS) and Clear To Send (CTS) signals co -ordinate the communication 
between DTE and DCE.  
 Whenever the DTE has a data to send, it activates the RTS line and if the DCE is ready to 
accept t he data, it activates the CTS line.  
 The Data Terminal Ready (DTR) signal is activated by DTE when it is ready to accept data.  
 The Data Set Ready (DSR) is activated by DCE when it is ready for establishing a 
communication link.  
 DTR should be in the activate d state before the activation of DSR.  
 The Data Carrier Detect (DCD) is used by the DCE to indicate the DTE that a good signal is 
being received.  


--- Page 74 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 15 
  Ring Indicator (RI) is a modem specific signal line for indicating an incoming call on the 
telephone line.  
 As per the EIA standard RS -232 C supports baudrates up to 20Kbps (Upper limit 19.2Kbps) . 
 The commonly used baudrates by devices are 300bps, 1200bps, 2400bps, 9600bps, 
11.52Kbps and 19.2Kbps.  
 The maximum operating distance supported in RS -232 communication is 5 0 feet at the 
highest supported baudrate.  
 Embedded devices contain a UART for serial communication and they generate signal levels 
conforming to TTL/CMOS logic.  
 A level translator IC like MAX 232 from Maxim Dallas semiconductor is used for converting 
the s ignal lines from the UART to RS -232 signal lines for communication.  
 On the receiving side the received data is converted back to digital logic level by a converter 
IC. 
 Converter chips contain converters for both transmitter and receiver.  
 RS-232 uses single  ended data transfer and supports only point -to-point communication and 
not suitable for multi -drop communication.  
USB (UNIVERSAL SERIAL BUS):  
 External Bus Standard.  
 Allows connection of peripheral  devices.  
 Connects Devices such as keyboards, mice, scanners, printers,  joysticks, audio 
devices,  disks.  
 Facilitates transfers of data at 480 (USB 2.0 only), 12 or 1.5 Mb/s  (mega - 
bits/second).  
 Developed by a Special Interest Group including Intel, Microsoft, Compact, DEC, 
IBM, Northern Telecom and NEC orig inally in  1994.  
 Low-Speed: 10 – 100 kb/s  
 1.5 Mb/s signaling bit  rate 
 Full-Speed: 500 kb/s – 10 Mb/s 12 Mb/s signaling bit  rate 
 High -Speed: 400  Mb/s  

--- Page 75 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 16 
  480 Mb/s signaling bit rate  
 NRZI with bit stuffing used  
 SYNC field present for every packet  
 There exist two pre-defined connectors in any USB system - Series “A” and Series “B” 
Connectors.  
 Series “A” cable: Connects USB devices to a hub port.  
 Series “B” cable: Connects detachable devices (hot - swappable)  
Bus Topology:  
 
 Connects computer to peripheral  devices.  
 Ultimately intended to replace parallel and serial  ports  
 Tiered Star  Topology  
 All devices are linked to a common point referred to as the root hub. 
 Specification allows for up to 127 (27 -1) different  devices.  
 
 
 Four wire cable serves as interconnect of system - power, ground and two differential 
signaling  lines.  
 USB is a polled bus -all transactions are initiated by  host. 
 


--- Page 76 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 17 
 USB HOST : Device that controls entire system usually a PC of some form. Processes data 
arriving to and from the USB port. 
USB HUB: Tests for new devices and maintains status information of child devices.Serve as 
repeaters, boosting strength of up and downstream signals.  Electrically isolates devices from one 
another - allowing an expanded number of devices.  
2.Wireless communication interface  : Wireless communication interface is an interface used to 
transmission of information over a distance without help of wires, cables or any other forms of 
electrical conductors.  
They are basically classified into following types  
1. Infrared  
2. Bluetooth  
3. Wi-Fi 
4. Zigbee  
5. GPRS  
INFRARED:  
 Infrared is a certain region in the light  spectrum  
 Ranges from .7µ to 1000µ or .1mm  
 Broken into near, mid, and far  infrared  
 One step up on the light spectrum from visible  light  
 Measure of  heat  
 
Most of the thermal radiation emitted by objects near room temperature is infrared. Infrared 
radiation is used in industrial, scientific, and medical applications. Night -vision devices using 
active near -infrared illumination allow people or animals to be observed without the observer 
being detected.  


--- Page 77 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 18 
  
IR transmission:  
The transmitter of an IR LED inside its circuit, which emits infrared light for every electric pulse 
given to it. This pulse is generated as a button on the remote is pressed, thus completing the 
circuit, providing bias to the LED.  
The LED on being biased emits light of the wavelength of 940nm as a series of pulses, 
corresponding to the button pressed. However since along with the IR LED man y other sources 
of infrared light such as us human beings, light bulbs, sun, etc, the transmitted information can be 
interfered. A solution to this problem is by modulation. The transmitted signal is modulated using 
a carrier frequency of 38 KHz (or any ot her frequency between 36 to 46 KHz). The IR LED is 
made to oscillate at this frequency for the time duration of the pulse. The information or the light 
signals are pulse width modulated and are contained in the 38 KHz frequency . 
IR supports data rates rang ing from 9600bits/second to 16Mbps  
Serial infrared: 9600bps to 115.2 kbps  
Medium infrared: 0.576Mbps to 1.152 Mbps  
Fast infrared: 4Mbps  
BLUETOOTH:  
 
Bluetooth is a wireless technology standard for short distances  (using  short -wavelength  UHF
 band from 2.4 to 2.485 GHz )for exchanging data over  radio waves in the ISM  and mobile 
devices, and building  personal area networks (PANs).Invented by telecom vendor Ericsson  in 
1994, it was originally conceived as a wireless alternative to RS- 232 data cables.  


--- Page 78 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 19 
  Bluetooth uses a radio technology called frequency - hopping spread  spectrum. Bluetooth 
divides  transmitted data into packets,  and transmits each packet on one of 79 designated 
Bluetooth channels. Each channel has a bandwidth of 1 MHz. It usually performs 800 hops per 
second, with Adaptive Frequency -Hopping (AFH)  enabled  
 Originally, Gaussian frequency -shift keying  (GFSK) modulation was the only modulation 
scheme available. Since the introduction of Bluetooth 2.0+EDR, π/4-DQPSK  (Differential 
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying) and 8DPSK modulation may also be used between compatible  
devices. Bluetooth is a packet -based protocol with a  master - slave structure . One master may 
communicate with up to seven slaves in a  piconet . All devices share the master's clock. Packet 
exchange is based on the basic clock, defined by the master, which ticks  at312.5 µs intervals.  
 A master BR/EDR Bluetooth device can communicate with a maximum of seven devices 
in a piconet (an ad -hoc computer network using  Bluetooth technology), though not all devices 
reach this maximum. The devices can switch roles, by agreement, and the slave can become the 
master (for example, a headset initiating a connection to a phone necessarily begins as master —
as initiator of the c onnection —but may subsequently operate as  slave).  
Wi-Fi: 
 Wi-Fi is the name of a popular wireless networking technology that uses radio waves to 
provide wireless high -speed Internet and network connections  
 Wi-Fi follows the IEEE 802.11 standard  
 Wi-Fi is intended for network communication and it supports Internet Protocol (IP) based 
communication  
 Wi-Fi based communications require an intermediate agent called Wi -Fi router/Wireless 
Access point to manage the communications.  
 The Wi -Fi router is responsible f or restricting the access to a network, assigning IP address to 
devices on the network, routing data packets to the intended devices on the network.  

--- Page 79 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 20 
  
 
 Wi-Fi enabled devices contain a wireless adaptor for transmitting and receiving data in 
the form of radi o signals through an antenna.  
 Wi-Fi operates at 2.4GHZ or 5GHZ of radio spectrum and they co -exist with other ISM 
band devices like Bluetooth.  
 A Wi -Fi network is identified with a Service Set Identifier (SSID). A Wi -Fi device can 
connect to a network by se lecting the SSID of the network and by providing the 
credentials if the network is security enabled  
 Wi-Fi networks implements different security mechanisms for authentication and data 
transfer.  
 Wireless Equivalency Protocol (WEP), Wireless Protected Access  (WPA) etc are some of 
the security mechanisms supported by Wi -Fi networks in data communication.  
ZIGBEE:  
Zigbee is an IEEE 802.15.4 -based  specification  for a suite of high - level communication 
protocols used to create  personal area networks  with small, low -power  digital radios , such as for 
home automation, medical device data collection, and other low -power lo w-bandwidth needs, 
designed for small scale projects which need wireless  connection.Hence, zigbee is a low -power, 
low data rate, and close proximity  (i.e., personal area) wireless ad hoc network .The technology 


--- Page 80 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 21 
 defined by the zigbee specification is intended to be  simpler and less expensive than other  
wireless personal area  networks (WPANs), such as Bluetooth or Wi-Fi . Applications include 
wireless light switches, electrical meters with in -home -displays, traffic management systems, and 
other consumer and industrial equipment that require short -range low - rate wireless data transfer . 
Its low power consumption limits transmission distances to 10 – 100 meters line-of-sight, 
depending on power output and environmental characteristics.  Zigbee devices can transmit data 
over long distances by passing data through a mesh network  of intermediate devices to reach  
more distant ones.  
 
 
Zigbee Coordinator : The zigbee coordinator acts as the root of the zigbee network. The ZC is 
responsible for initiating the Zigbee network and it has the capability to store information about 
the network.  
Zigbee Router : Responsible for passing information from device to another device or to another 
ZR. 
Zigbee end device :End device containing zigbee functionality for data communication. It can 
talk only with a ZR or ZC and doesn’t have the capability to act as a mediator for transferr ing 
data from one device to another.  
Zigbee supports an operating distance of up to 100 metres at a data rate of 20 to 250 Kbps.  
 
 


--- Page 81 ---
MRCET ECE                                                                       ESD UNIT -3 NOTES  
 
N SURESH, Asst.Prof ,ECE Dept.  Page 22 
 General Packet Radio Service(GPRS):  
General Packet Radio Ser vice (GPRS ) is a packe t oriented mobile  data service on the 2G and 
3G cellular  communication system's  global system for mobile  communications  (GSM). GPRS 
was originally standardized by European Telecommunications  Standards Institute  (ETSI)  GPRS 
usage is typically charged based on volume of data transferred, contrasting with circuit switched  
data, which is usually billed per minute of connection time. Sometimes billing time is broken 
down  to every third of a minute. Usage above the bundle  cap is charged  per megabyte, speed 
limited, or disallowed.  
Services offered:  
 GPRS extends the GSM Packet circuit switched d ata capabilities and makes the 
following services  possible:  
 SMS messaging and  broadcasting  
 "Always on" internet  access  
 Multimedia messaging service  (MMS)  
 Push -to-talk over cellular  (PoC)  
 Instant messaging  and presence -wireless village  Internet  applications for smar t devices 
through  wireless application  protocol  (WAP) . 
 Point -to-point (P2P) service: inter -networking with the Internet  (IP). 
 Point -to-multipoint  (P2M ) service ]: point -to- multipoint multicast and point -to-multipoint 
group  calls.  
 
 
 
Text Book: - 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill  

--- Page 82 ---
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT -4 
 
EMBEDDED FIRMWARE DE SIGN & 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
N.SURESH  
Department of ECE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 83 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 1        
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction:  Embedded Firmware  
  The control algorithm (Program instructions) and or the configuration 
settings that an embedded system developer dumps into the code (Program) 
memory of the embedded  system  
It is an un -avoidable part of an embedded system.  
The embedded firmware can be developed in various methods like  
o Write the program in high level languages like Embedded C/C++ 
using an Integrated Development Environment (The IDE will contain 
an editor, compiler, linker, debugger, sim ulator etc. IDEs are different 
for different family of  processors/controllers.  
o Write the program in Assembly Language using the Instructions 
Supported by your application’s target  processor/controller  
Embedded Firmware Design & Development:  
The embedded fi rmware is responsible for controlling the various 
peripherals of the embedded hardware and generating response in 
accordance with the functional requirements of the  product.  
The embedded firmware is the master brain of the embedded system. 
The embedded fir mware imparts intelligence to an Embedded system. 
It is a onetime process and it can happen at any stage.  
The product starts functioning properly once the intelligence imparted to the 
product by embedding the firmware in the hardware.  
The product will continue serving the assigned task till hardware breakdown 
occurs or a corruption in embedded firmware.  
  In case of hardware breakdown , the damaged component may need to be 
replaced and for firmware corruptions the firmware should be re -loaded, to 
bring  back the embedded product to the normal  functioning.  


--- Page 84 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 2        
 
 
 
  The embedded firmware is usually stored in a permanent memory (ROM) 
and it is non alterable by end  users.  
  Designing Embedded firmware requires understanding of the particular 
embedded product hardware, like various component interfacing, memory 
map details, I/O port details, configuration and register details of various 
hardware chips used and some programming language (either low level 
Assembly Language or High level language like C/C++ or a combination of 
the two) 
The embedded firmware development process starts with the conversion of 
the firmware requirements into a program model using various modeling 
tools.  
The firmware design approaches for embedded product is purely depen dent 
on the complexity of the functions to be performed and speed of operation 
required.  
There exist two basic approaches for the design and implementation of 
embedded firmware, namely;  
 The Super loop based  approach  
 The Embedded Operating System based  approach  
The decision on which approach needs to be adopted for firmware 
development is purely dependent on the complexity and system 
requirements  
1. Embedded firmware Design Approaches – The Super loop:  
The Super loop based firmware development approach is S uitable for 
applications that are not time critical and where the response time is not so 
important (Embedded systems where missing deadlines are acceptable).  


--- Page 85 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 3        
 
 
 
  It is very similar to a conventional procedural programming where the code 
is executed task by  task 
  The tasks are executed in a never ending  loop.  
  The task listed on top on the program code is executed first and the tasks just 
below the top are executed after completing the first  task 
A typical super loop implementation wil l look like:  
1. Configure the common parameters and perform initialization for 
various hardware components memory, registers  etc. 
2. Start the first task and execute it  
3. Execute the second  task 
4. Execute the next task 
5. : 
6. : 
7. Execute the last defined  task 
8. Jump back to the first task and follow the same  flow.  
The ‘C’ program code for the super loop is given below 
void main ()  
{ 
Configurations (); 
Initializations ();  
while (1)  
{ 
Task 1  (); 
Task 2  (); 
: 


--- Page 86 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 4        
 
 
 
: 
Task n ();  
} 
} 
Pros:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cons:  Doesn’t require an Operating System for task scheduling and monitoring and 
free from OS related overheads  
Simple and straight forward design 
Reduced memory footprint  
 
Non Real time in execution behavior (As the number of tasks increases the 
frequency at which a task gets CPU time for execution also increases)  
Any issues in any task execution may affect the functioning of the product 
(This can be effectively tackled by using Watch Dog Timers for task 
execution monitoring)  
 
Enhancements:  
 Combine Super loop based technique with  interrupts 
 Execute the tasks (like keyboard handling) which require Real time attention 
as Interrupt Service  routines.
2. Embedded firmware Design Approaches – Embedded OS based  Approach:  
   The embedded device contains an Embedded Operating System which can 
be one  of: 
 A Real Time Operating System  (RTOS)  
 A Customized General Purpose Operating System  (GPOS)  


--- Page 87 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 5        
 
 
 
  The Embedded OS is responsible for scheduling the execution of user tasks 
and the allocation of system resources among multiple  tasks  
  It Involves lot of OS related overheads apart from managing and executing 
user defined tasks  
Microsoft® Windows XP Embedded is an example of GPOS for embedded 
devices  
Point of Sale (Po S) terminals, Gaming Stations, Tablet PCs etc are examples 
of embedded devices running on embedded GPOSs  
‘Windows CE ’, ‘ Windows Mobile ’,‘QNX ’, ‘ VxWorks ’, ‘ ThreadX ’, 
‘MicroC/OS -II’, ‘Embedded Linux ’, ‘Symbian ’ etc are examples of RTOSs 
employed in Embedded Product development  
Mobile Phones, PDAs, Flight Control Systems etc are examples of 
embedded devices that runs on  RTOSs  
Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options  
Assembly Language 
High Level Language  
o Subset of C (Embedded  C) 
o Subset of C++ (Embedded  C++)  
o Any other high level language with supported  Cross -compiler  
Mix of Assembly & High level Language  
o Mixing High Level Language (Like C) with Assembly  Code  
o Mixing Assembly code with High Level Language (Like  C) 
o Inline  Assembly  


--- Page 88 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 6        
 
 
 
1. Embedded  firmware  Development  Languages/Options  – Assembly 
Language  
  ‘Assembly  Language ’ is the human  readable  notation  of ‘machine 
language ’ 
‘Machine language ’ is a processor understandable language  
Machine language is a binary representation and it cons ists of 1s and 0s 
Assembly  language  and machine  languages  are processor/controller 
dependent  
An Assembly language program written for one processor/controller family 
will not work with others  
Assembly language programming is the process of writing processo r specific 
machine code in mnemonic form, converting the mnemonics into actual 
processor instructions (machine language) and associated data using an 
assembler  
The general format of an assembly language instruction is an Opcode 
followed by Operands  
The Opcode tells the processor/controller what to do and the Operands 
provide the data and information required to perform the action specified by 
the opcode  
It is not necessary that all opcode should have Operands following them. 
Some of the Opcode implicitly  contains the operand and in such situation no 
operand is required. The operand may be a single operand, dual operand or 
more  
The 8051 Assembly Instruction 
MOV A, #30  
Moves decimal value 30 to the 8051 Accumulator register. Here MOV A is the 
Opcode and 30 is the operand (single operand). The same instruction when written 
in machine language will look like  


--- Page 89 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 7        
 
 
 
01110100 00011110  
The first 8 bit binary value 01110100 represents the opcode MOV A and the second 
8 bit binary value 00011110 represents the operand 30.  
  Assembly language instructions are written one per  line 
A machine code program consists of a sequence of assembly language 
instructions, where each statement contains a mnemonic (Opcode + 
Operand)  
Each line of an assembly language p rogram is split into four fields as:  
LABEL  OPCODE  OPERAND  COMMENTS  
LABEL is an optional field. A ‘LABEL’ is an identifier used extensively in 
programs to reduce the reliance on programmers for remembering where 
data or code is located. LABEL is commonly used for  representing  
A memory location, address of a program, sub -routine, code portion  etc. 
 The maximum length of a label differs between assemblers. 
Assemblers insist strict formats for labeling. Labels are always 
suffixed by a colon and begin with a va lid character. Labels can 
contain number from 0 to 9 and special character _  (underscore).  
;###############################################################  
; SUBROUTINE FOR GENERATING  DELAY  
; DELAY PARAMETR PASSED THROUGH REGISTER  R1 
; RETURN VALUE NONE,REGISTERS USED: R0,  R1 
;###############################################################  
#####  DELAY:  MOV  R0, #255  ; Load Register R0 with  255 
DJNZ R1, DELAY; Decrement R1 and  loop till  R1= 0 
RET   ; Return to calling  program  


--- Page 90 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 8        
 
 
 
 The symbol ; represents the start of a comment. Assembler ignores the 
text in a line after the ; symbol while assembling the  program  
 DELAY is a label for representing the start address of the memory 
location where the piece of code is located in code  memory  
 The above piece of code can be executed by giving the label DELAY as 
part of the instruction. E.g. LCALL DELAY; LMP  DELAY  
2. Assembly Language – Source File to Hex File  Translation:  
The Assembly language program written in  assembly code is  saved as  
.asm (Assembly file) file or a .src (source) file or a format supported by 
the assembler  
Similar to ‘C’ and other high level language programming, it is possible  
to have multiple source files called modules in assembly language 
programming. Each module is  represented by a ‘. asm’ or ‘ .src’ file or the 
assembler supported file format similar to the ‘ .c’ files in C  programming  
The software utility called ‘Assembler’ performs the translation of 
assembly code to machine code  
The assemblers for different family of target machines are different. A51 
Macro Assembler from Keil software is a popular assembler for the 8051 
family micro controller  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Assembly Language to machine language conversion process  

--- Page 91 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 9        
 
 
 
  Each source file can be assembled separately to examine the syntax errors 
and incorrect assembly instructions  
  Assembling of each source file generates a corresponding object file. The 
object file does not contain the absolute address of where the generated 
code needs to be pla ced (a re -locatable code) on the program  memory  
The software program called linker/locater is responsible for assigning 
absolute address to object files during the linking process  
The Absolute object file created from the object files corresponding to  
different source code modules contain information about the address 
where each instruction needs to be placed in code  memory  
A software utility called ‘Object to Hex file converter’ translates the 
absolute object file to corresponding hex file (binary fil e) 
Advantages:  
 1.Efficient Code Memory & Data Memory Usage (Memory  Optimization):  
 The developer is well aware of the target processor architecture and 
memory organization, so optimized code can be written for 
performing  operations . 
 This leads to less utilization of code memory and efficient utilization 
of data  memory.  
 2.High  Performance:  
 Optimized code not only improves the code memory usage but also 
improves the total system  performance.  
 Through effective assembly coding, optimum performance can be 
achieved for target  processor.  
 3.Low level Hardware  Access:  
 Most of the code for low level programming like accessing external 
device specific registers from OS kernel ,device drivers, and low level 
interrupt routines, etc are making use of direct assembly  coding.  


--- Page 92 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 10        
  
 
 4.Code Reverse  Engineering:  
 It is the process of understanding the technology behind a product by 
extracting the information from the finished  product.  
 It can easily be converted into assembly code using a dis -assembler 
program for the target  machine.  
Drawbacks:  
1.High Development  time:  
 The developer takes lot of time to study about architecture ,memory 
organization, addressing modes and instruction set of target 
processor/controller.  
 More lines of assembly code is required for performing a  simple 
action.  
2.Developer  dependency:  
 There is no common written rule for developing assembly language 
based applications.  
3.Non  portable:  
 Target applications written in assembly instructions are valid only for 
that particular family of proce ssors and cannot be re -used for another 
target  processors/controllers.  
 If the target processor/controller changes, a complete re -writing of the 
application using assembly language for new target 
processor/controller is required.  
2. Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options – High Level 
Language  
  The embedded firmware is written in any high level language like C,  C++ 
  A software utility called ‘cross -compiler’ converts the high level language to 
target processor specific machine  code  


--- Page 93 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 11        
 
 
 
 The cross -compilation of each module generates a corresponding object 
file. The object file does not contain the absolute address of where the 
generated code needs to be placed (a re -locatable code) on the program 
memory
 The software program called linker/locater is responsible for assigning 
absolute address to object files during the linking  process
 The Absolute object file created from the object files corresponding to 
different source code modules contain information about the address where 
each instruction needs to be placed in code  memory
 A software utility called ‘Object to Hex file converter’ translates the 
absolute object file to corresponding hex file (binary  file)
Embedded  firmware  Development  Languages/Options  – High  Level 
Language – Source File to Hex File  Translation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Machine Code 
(Hex File)  
 
 
Figure 6: High level language to machine language conversion process  Library Files  
Source File 1 
(.c /.c++ etc) 
(Module -1)  
Module 
Cross -compiler   
Object File 1  
Source File 2 
(.c /.c++ etc) 
(Module -2)  
Module 
Cross -compiler   
Object File 2  
Object to Hex File 
Converter   
Absolute Object File  Linker/ 
Locator  

--- Page 94 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 12        
 
 
 
Advantages:  
  Reduced Development time: Developer requires less or little 
knowledge on internal hardware details and architecture of the target 
processor/Controller.  
Developer independency: The syntax used by most of the high level 
languages are universal and a program written high level can easily 
understand by a second person knowing the syntax of the language  
Portability: An Application written in high level language for 
particular target processor /controller can be easily be converted to 
another target proce ssor/controller specific application with little or 
less effort  
Drawbacks:  
• The cross compilers may not be efficient in generating the optimized 
target processor specific  instructions.  
• Target images created by such compilers may be messy and non - 
optimized in terms of performance as well as code  size. 
• The investment required for high level language based development 
tools (IDE) is high compared to Assembly Language based firmware 
development tools.  
Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options – Mixing of Assembly 
Language with High Level Language  
Embedded firmware development may require the mixing of Assembly 
Language with high level language or vice versa.  
   Interrupt  handling,  Source code is already available in high level 
language \Assembly Language etc are  examples  


--- Page 95 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 13        
 
 
 
  High Level language and low level language can be mixed in three different 
ways  
 Mixing Assembly Language with High level language like  ‘C’ 
 Mixing High level language like ‘C’ with Assembly  Language  
 In line Assembly  
The passing of parameters and return values between the high level and low 
level language is cross -compiler specific  
1. Mixing  Assembly  Language  with  High  level  language  like ‘C’ 
(Assembly Language with  ‘C’):  
Assembly routines are mixed with ‘C’ in s ituations where the entire program 
is written in ‘C’ and the cross compiler in use do not have built in support 
for implementing certain features like ISR.  
If the programmer wants to take advantage of the speed and optimized code 
offered by the machine cod e generated by hand written assembly rather than 
cross compiler generated machine code.  
For accessing certain low level hardware ,the timing specifications may be 
very critical and cross compiler generated machine code may not be able to 
offer the required  time specifications accurately.  
Writing the hardware/peripheral access routine in processor/controller 
specific assembly language and invoking it from ‘C’ is the most advised 
method.  
Mixing ‘C’ and assembly is little complicated.  
  The programmer must be  aware of how to pass parameters from the ‘C’ 
routine to assembly and values returned from assembly routine to ‘C’ and 
how Assembly routine is invoked from the ‘C’  code.  


--- Page 96 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 14        
 
 
 
  Passing parameter to the assembly routine and returning values from  the 
assembly routine to the caller ‘C’ function and the method of invoking the 
assembly routine from ‘C’ code is cross compiler  dependent.  
  There is no universal written rule for  purpose.  
We can get this information from documentation of the c ross compiler.  
Different cross compilers implement these features in different ways 
depending on GPRs and memory supported by target processor/controller  
2. Mixing  High  level  language  like ‘C’ with  Assembly  Language 
(‘C’ with Assembly  Language)  
The source code is already available in assembly language and routine 
written in a high level language needs to be included to the existing code.  
The entire source code is planned in Assembly code for various reasons like 
optimized code, optimal performance, efficien t code memory utilization and 
proven expertise in handling the assembly.  
The functions written in ‘C’ use parameter passing to the function and 
returns values to the calling functions.  
The programmer must be aware of how parameters are passed to the 
functi on and how values returned from the function and how function is 
invoked from the assembly language  environment.  
Passing parameter to the function and returning values from the function 
using CPU registers , stack memory and fixed memory.  
Its implementatio n is cross compiler dependent and varies across compilers.  


--- Page 97 ---
Embedded Systems  Unit -4 Notes  
N.SURESH, Assistant  Professor, Dept. of ECE,  MRCET  Page 15        
  
 
3. In line  Assembly:  
• Inline assembly is another technique for inserting the target 
processor/controller specific assembly instructions at any location of source 
code written in high level language  ‘C’ 
• Inline Assembly avoids the delay in calling an assembly routine from a ‘C’ 
code.  
• Special keywords are used to indicate the start and end of Assembly 
instructions  
• E.g #pragma  asm 
Mov A,#13H  
#pragma ensasm  
• Keil C51 uses the keywords #prag ma asm and #pragma endasm to indicate 
a block of code written in  assembly . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Text  Books:  
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw  Hill 
2. Embedded System Design -Raj Kamal  TMH  

--- Page 98 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 1  
  
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN  
UNIT -V 
RTOS Based Embedded System Design  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N.SURESH  
Department of ECE  
 
 
 


--- Page 99 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 2  
 
OS manages  
resources  and 
available  to the system 
makes   them  
the user 
applications/tasks on a need basis  
The primary functions of an Operating system is  
➢ Make the system convenient to  use 
➢ Organize and manage the system resources efficiently and  correctly  
User Applications  
   Application Programming 
Interface (API)  
Underlying Hardware  Device Driver 
Interface  I/O System  Management  File System Management  Time Management  Process Management  Memory Management  Operating System Basics:  
• The Operating System acts as a bridge between the user applications/tasks 
and the underlying system resources through a set of system functionalities 
and services  
• 
 
 
 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The Architecture of Operating System  Kernel Services  

--- Page 100 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 3  
  
 
The Kernel:  
• The kernel is the core of the operating  system  
• It is responsible for managing the system resources and the  communication 
among the hardware and other system  services  
• Kernel acts as the abstraction layer between system resources and user 
applications  
• Kernel contains a set of system libraries and  services.  
• For a general purpose OS, the kernel contains different services  like 
➢ Process Ma nagement  
➢ Primary Memory  Management  
➢ File System  management  
➢ I/O System (Device)  Management  
➢ Secondary Storage  Management  
➢ Protection  
➢ Time  management  
➢ Interrupt  Handling  
Kernel Space and User Space:  
• The program code corresponding to the kernel applications/services are kept 
in a contiguous area (OS dependent) of primary (working) memory and is 
protected from the un -authorized access by user  programs/applications  
• The memory space at which the kernel code is located is known as ‘ Kernel 
Space’  

--- Page 101 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 4  
 
 
 
• All user applications are loaded to a specific area of primary memory and 
this memory area is referred as ‘ User  Space ’ 
• The partitioning of memory into kernel and user space is purely Operating 
System  dependent  
• An operating system with virtual memory support, loads the user 
applications into its corresponding virtual memory space with demand 
paging  technique  
• Most of the operating systems keep the kernel application code in main 
memory and it is not swapped out into the second ary memory  
Monolithic Kernel:  
• All kernel services run in the kernel  space  
• All kernel modules run within the same memory space under a single kernel 
thread  
• The tight internal integration of kernel modules in monolithic kernel 
architecture allows the  effective  
utilization of the low -level features of  
the underlying system  
• The major drawback of monolithic 
kernel is that any error or failure in 
any one of the kernel modules leads to 
the crashing of the entire kernel 
application  
• LINUX, SOLARIS, MS -DOS kernels 
are examples of monolithic  kernel  Applications  
 
 
 
 
 
Monolithic kernel with all 
operating system services 
running in kernel space  
Figure 2: The Monolithic Kernel Model  

--- Page 102 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 5  
 
 
 
Microkernel  
• The microkernel  design incorporates only the essential set of  Operating 
System services into the  kernel  
• Rest of the Operating System services are implemented in programs  known 
as ‘Servers ’ which runs in user  space  
• The kernel design is highly 
modular provides OS -neutral 
abstraction.  
• Memory management,  process  Servers (kernel 
services  running 
in user  space)   
 
Applications  
management, timer systems and 
interrupt handlers are examples of 
essential services, whi ch forms the  part 
of the  microkernel  Microkernel with essential 
services like memory 
management, process 
management, timer systemetc...  
 
Figure 3: The Microkernel Model  
• QNX, Minix 3 kernels are examples for  microkernel.  
Benefits of Microkernel:  
1. Robustness: If a problem is encountered in any services in server can 
reconfigured and re -started without the need for re -starting the entire  OS. 
2. Configurability: Any services , which run as ‘server’ application can  be 
changed with out need to restart the whole  system.  
Types of Operating Systems:  
Depending on the type of kernel and kernel services, purpose and type of 
computing systems where the OS is deployed and the responsiveness to 
applications, Operating Systems are classified into  
1. General Purpose Operating System  (GPOS):  
2. Real Time Purpose Operating System  (RTOS):  

--- Page 103 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 6  
  
 
1. General Purpose Operating System  (GPOS):  
• Operating Systems, which are deployed in general computing  systems  
• The kernel is more generalized and contains all the required services  to 
execute generic  applications  
• Need not be deterministic in execution behavior  
• May inject random delays into application software and thus cause  slow 
responsiveness of an application at unexpected  times  
• Usually deployed in computing systems where deterministic behavior is not 
an important  criterion  
• Personal Computer/Desktop system is a typical example for a system  where 
GPOSs are  deployed.  
• Windows XP/MS -DOS etc are examples of General Purpose Operating 
System  
2. Real Time Purpose Operating System  (RTOS):  
• Operating Systems, which are deployed in embedded systems  demanding 
real-time response  
• Deterministic in execution behavior. Consumes only known amount of  time 
for kernel applications  
• Implements  scheduling  policies  for executing  the highest  priority 
task/application  always  
• Implements policies and rules concerning time -critical allocation of a 
system’s resources  
• Windows CE, QNX, VxWorks , MicroC/OS -II etc are examples of Real 
Time Operating Systems  (RTOS)  

--- Page 104 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 7  
  
 
The Real Time Kernel: The kernel of a Real Time Operating System is referred 
as Real Time kernel. In complement to the conventional OS kernel, the Real Time 
kernel is highly specialized and it contains only the minimal set of servic es 
required for running the user applications/tasks. The basic functions of a Real Time 
kernel  are 
a) Task/Process management  
b) Task/Process  scheduling  
c) Task/Process  synchronization  
d) Error/Exception  handling  
e) Memory  Management  
f) Interrupt handling  
g) Time management  
• Real Time Kernel Task/Process Management: Deals with setting up the 
memory space for the tasks, loading the task’s code into the memory space, 
allocating system resources, setting up a Task Control Block (TCB) for the task 
and task/process termi nation/deletion. A Task Control Block (TCB) is used for 
holding the information corresponding to a task. TCB usually contains the 
following set of  information  
❖ Task ID: Task Identification  Number  
❖ Task State: The current state of the task. (E.g. State= ‘Read y’ for a  task 
which is ready to  execute)  
❖ Task Type : Task type. Indicates what is the type for this task. The task  can 
be a hard real time or soft real time or background  task. 
❖ Task Priority : Task priority (E.g. Task priority =1 for task with priority =  1) 
❖ Task Context Pointer : Context pointer. Pointer for context  saving  

--- Page 105 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 8  
 
 
 
❖ Task Memory Pointers : Pointers to the code memory, data memory  and 
stack memory for the  task 
❖ Task System Resource Pointers : Pointers to system resources (semaphores, 
mutex etc) used by the  task 
❖ Task Pointers: Pointers to other TCBs (TCBs for preceding, next and 
waiting tasks)  
❖ Other Parameters Other relevant task  parameters  
The parameters and implementation of the TCB is kernel dependent. The TCB  
parameters vary across different kernels, based on the task management 
implementation  
• Task/Process Scheduling: Deals with sharing the CPU among various 
tasks/processes. A kernel application called ‘ Scheduler ’ handles the task 
scheduling. Scheduler is noth ing but an algorithm implementation, which 
performs the efficient and optimal scheduling of tasks to provide a deterministic 
behavior.  
Task/Process Synchronization: Deals with synchronizing the concurrent 
access of a resource, which is shared across multi ple tasks and the 
communication between various tasks.  
Error/Exception handling: Deals with registering and handling the errors 
occurred/exceptions raised during the execution of tasks. Insufficient memory, 
timeouts, deadlocks, deadline missing, bus error , divide by zero, unknown 
instruction execution etc, are examples of errors/exceptions. Errors/Exceptions 
can happen at the kernel level services or at task level. Deadlock is an example 
for kernel level exception, whereas timeout is an example for a task level 
exception. The OS kernel gives the information about the error in the form of a 
system call (API).  

--- Page 106 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 9  
 
 
 
Memory Management:  
❖ The memory management function of an RTOS kernel is slightly 
different compared to the General Purpose Operating  Systems  
❖ The memory allocation time increases depending on the size of the block 
of memory needs to be allocated and the state of the allocated memory 
block (initialized memory block consumes more allocation time than un - 
initialized memory  block ) 
❖ Since predictable timing and deterministic behavior are the primary focus 
for an RTOS, RTOS achieves this by compromising the effectiveness of 
memory  allocation  
❖ RTOS generally uses ‘ block ’ based memory allocation technique, instead 
of the usual dynamic m emory allocation techniques used by the  GPOS.  
❖ RTOS kernel uses blocks of fixed size of dynamic memory and the block 
is allocated for a task on a need basis. The blocks are stored in a ‘ Free 
buffer Queue ’. 
❖ Most of the RTOS kernels allow tasks to access any of the memory 
blocks without any memory protection to achieve predictable timing and 
avoid the timing  overheads  
❖ RTOS kernels assume that the whole design is proven correct and 
protection is unnecessary. Some commercial RTOS kernels allow 
memory protection as optional and the kernel enters a fail-safe mode 
when an illegal memory access  occurs  
❖ The memory management fu nction of an RTOS kernel is slightly 
different compared to the General Purpose Operating  Systems  
❖ A few RTOS kernels implement Virtual Memory concept for memory 
allocation if the system supports secondary memory storage (like HDD 
and FLASH memory).  

--- Page 107 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 10  
 
 
 
❖ In the ‘ block ’ based memory allocation, a block of fixed memory is 
always allocated for tasks on need basis and it is taken as a unit. Hence, 
there will not be any memory fragmentation  issues.  
❖ The memory allocation can be implemented as constant functions and 
thereby it consumes fixed amount of time for memory allocation. This 
leaves the deterministic behavior of the RTOS kernel  untouched.  
Interrupt Handling:  
❖ Interrupts inform the processor that an external device or an as sociated 
task requires immediate attention of the  CPU.  
❖ Interrupts can be either Synchronous or Asynchronous . 
❖ Interrupts which occurs in sync with the currently executing task is known 
as Synchronous interrupts. Usually the software interrupts fall under the 
Synchronous Interrupt category. Divide by zero, memory segmentation 
error etc are examples of Synchronous  interrupts.  
❖ For synchronous interrupts, the interrupt handler runs in the same context 
of the interrupting  task. 
❖ Asynchronous interrupts are interrupts, which occurs at any point of 
execution of any task, and are not in sync with the currently executing 
task. 
❖ The interrupts generated by external devices (by asserting the Interrupt 
line of the processor/controller to which the interrupt line of the device is 
connected) connected to the processor/controller, timer overflow 
interrupts, serial data reception/ tr ansmission interrupts etc are examples 
for asynchronous  interrupts.  
❖ For asynchronous interrupts, the interrupt handler is usually written as 
separate task (Depends on OS Kernel implementation) and it runs in  a 

--- Page 108 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 11  
 
 
 
different context. Hence, a co ntext switch happens while handling the 
asynchronous interrupts.  
❖ Priority levels can be assigned to the interrupts and each interrupts can be 
enabled or disabled  individually.  
❖ Most of the RTOS kernel implements ‘ Nested Interrupts ’ architecture. 
Interrupt nesting allows the pre -emption (interruption) of an Interrupt 
Service Routine (ISR), servicing an interrupt, by a higher priority 
interrupt.  
Time Management:  
❖ Interrupts inform the processor that an external device or an associated 
task requires immediate attention of the  CPU.  
❖ Accurate time management is essential for providing precise time 
reference for all applications  
❖ The time reference to kernel is provided by a high -resolution Real Time 
Clock (RTC) hardware chip (hard ware  timer)  
❖ The hardware timer is programmed to interrupt the processor/controller 
at a fixed rate. This timer interrupt is referred as ‘Timer  tick’ 
❖ The ‘Timer tick’ is taken as the timing reference by the kernel. The 
‘Timer tick’ interval may vary dependi ng on the hardware timer. Usually 
the ‘Timer tick’ varies in the microseconds  range  
❖ The time parameters for tasks are expressed as the multiples of the 
‘Timer  tick’ 
❖ The System time is updated based on the ‘Timer  tick’ 
❖ If the System time register is 32 bits wide and the ‘Timer tick’ interval is 
1microsecond, the System time register will reset  in 
232 * 10 -6/ (24 * 60 * 60) = 49700 Days =~ 0.0497 Days = 1.19 Hours  

--- Page 109 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 12  
  
 
If the ‘Timer tick’ interval is 1 millisecond, the System time register will  
reset in  
232 * 10 -3 / (24 * 60 * 60) = 497 Days = 49.7 Days =~ 50 Days  
The ‘ Timer tick ’ interrupt is handled by the ‘Timer Interrupt’ handler of kernel. 
The ‘ Timer tick ’ interrupt can be utilized for implementing the following 
actions.  
• Save the current c ontext (Context of the currently executing  task)  
• Increment the System time register by one. Generate timing error and reset 
the System time register if the timer tick count is greater than the maximum 
range available for System time  register  
• Update the tim ers implemented in kernel (Increment or decrement the timer 
registers for each timer depending on the count direction setting for each 
register. Increment registers with count direction setting = ‘ count up ’ and 
decrement registers with count direction setting = ‘ count  down ’) 
• Activate the periodic tasks, which are in the idle  state 
• Invoke the scheduler and schedule the tasks again based on the scheduling 
algorithm  
• Delete all the terminated tasks and their associated data structures  (TCBs)  
• Load the context for the first task in the ready queue. Due to the re- 
scheduling, the ready task might be changed to a new one from the task, 
which was pre -empted by the ‘Timer Interrupt’  task 

--- Page 110 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 13  
 
 
 
Hard Real -time System:  
❖ A Real Time Operating Systems which strictly adheres to the timing 
constraints for a  task 
❖ A Hard Real Time system must meet the deadlines for a task without any 
slippage  
❖ Missing any deadline may produce catastrophic results for Hard Real 
Time Systems, including permanent data lose and irrecoverable damages 
to the  system/users  
❖ Emphasize on the principle ‘ A late answer is a wrong  answer ’ 
❖ Air bag control systems and Anti -lock Brake Systems (ABS) of vehicles 
are typical examples of Hard Real Time  Systems  
❖ As a rule of thumb, Hard Real Time Systems does not implement the 
virtual memory model for handling the memory. This eliminates the 
delay i n swapping in and out the code corresponding to the task to and 
from the primary  memory  
❖ The presence of Human in the loop (HITL ) for tasks introduces un - 
expected delays in the task execution. Most of the Hard Real Time 
Systems are automatic and does not c ontain a ‘human in the  loop’  
• Soft Real -time System:  
❖ Real Time Operating Systems that does not guarantee meeting  deadlines, 
but, offer the best effort to meet the  deadline  
❖ Missing deadlines for tasks are acceptable if the frequency of  deadline 
missing is wi thin the compliance limit of the Quality of Service  (QoS)  
❖ A Soft Real Time system emphasizes on the principle ‘ A late answer is an 
acceptable answer, but it could have done bit  faster’  
❖ Soft Real Time systems most often have a ‘ human in the loop  (HITL) ’ 

--- Page 111 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 14  
 
 
 
❖ Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) is a typical example of Soft Real Time  
System. If the ATM takes a few seconds more than the ideal operation 
time, nothing fatal  happens.  
❖ An audio video play back system is another example of Soft Real Time 
system. No potential damage arises if a sample comes late by fraction of a 
second, for play  back.  
Tasks, Processes & Threads : 
▪ In the Operating System context, a task is defined as the program in 
execution and the related information maintained by the  Operating 
system for the  program  
▪ Task is also known as ‘ Job’ in the operating system  context  
▪ A program or part of it in execution is also called a  ‘Process ’ 
▪ The terms ‘ Task ’, ‘job’ and ‘ Process ’ refer to the same entity in the 
Operating System context and  most often they are used  interchangeably  
▪ A process requires various system resources like CPU for executing the 
process, memory for storing the code corresponding to the process and 
associated variables, I/O devices for information exchange  etc 
The struct ure of a Processes  
▪ The concept of ‘ Process ’ leads to concurrent execution (pseudo parallelism) 
of tasks and thereby the efficient utilization of the CPU and other system 
resources  
▪ Concurrent execution is achieved through the sharing of CPU among the 
processes.  
▪ A process mimics a processor in properties and holds a set of registers, 
process status, a Program Counter (PC) to point to the next executable 
instruction of the process, a stack for holding the local variables associated 
with the process and t he code corresponding to the  process  

--- Page 112 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 15  
 
Code Memory 
corresponding to the 
Process   
 
 
Process  
▪ A process, which inherits all 
the properties of the CPU, 
can be considered as a 
virtual processor, awaiting 
its turn to have its properties 
switched into the physical 
processor  
 
Figure: 4 Structure of a Process  
• When the process gets its turn, its registers and Program counter  register 
becomes mapped to the physical registers of the  CPU  
Memory organization of Processes:  
▪ The memory occupied by the process  is 
segregated into three regions namely; Stack 
memory, Data memory and Code memory  
▪ The ‘Stack’ memory holds all temporary 
data such as vari ables local to the  process  
▪ Data memory holds all global data for the 
process  
▪ The code memory contains the program 
code (instructions) corresponding to the 
process  Stack Memory  
 
Stack memory grows 
downwards  
Data memory grows 
upwards  
 
 
Data Memory  
 
 
Code Memory  
 
Fig: 5 Memory organization of a Process  Stack 
(Stack Pointer)  
 
Working Registers  
 
Status Registers  
 
Program Counter (PC)  
 

--- Page 113 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 16  
 
 
 
▪ On loading a process into the main memory, a specific area of memory is 
allocated for the process  
▪ The stack memory usually starts at the highest memory address from the 
memory area allocated for the process (Depending on the OS kernel 
implementation)  
Process States & State Transition  
▪ The creation of a process to its termination is not a single step  operation  
▪ The process traverses through a series of states during its transition from the 
newly created state to the terminated  state 
▪ The cycle through which a process changes its state from ‘ newly created ’ to 
‘execution completed ’ is known as ‘ Process Life Cycle ’. The various states 
through which  a process traverses through during a Process Life Cycle 
indicates the current status of the process with respect to time and also 
provides information on what it is allowed to do  next 
Process States & State Transition : 
• Created State: The state at which a  process is being created is referred as 
‘Created State’. The Operating System recognizes a process in the ‘ Created 
State ’ but no resources are allocated to the  process  
• Ready State: The state, where a process is incepted into the memory and 
awaiting the processor time for execution, is known as ‘ Ready State ’. At 
this stage, the process is placed in the ‘ Ready list ’ queue maintained by the 
OS 
• Running State: The state where in the source code instructions 
corresponding to the process is being e xecuted is called ‘ Running State ’. 
Running state is the state at which the process execution  happens  

--- Page 114 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 17  
 
 
▪ . Blocked State/Wait State: Refers 
to a state where a running process is 
temporarily suspended from 
execution and does not have 
immediate access to resources. The 
blocked state might have invoked by 
various conditions like - the process 
enters a wait state for an event to 
occur (E.g. Waiting for user inputs 
such as keyboard input) or waiting 
for getting access to a shared 
resou rce like semaphore, mutex  etc  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blocked  Created  
 
 
Incepted into memory  
 
 
Ready  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Running  
 
 
Execution Completion  
 
 
Completed  
 
Figure 6.Process states and State transition  
 
▪ Completed State: A state where the process completes its  execution  
 The transition of a process from one state to another is known  as 
‘Statetransition ’ 
 When a process changes its state from Ready to running or  from 
running toblocked or terminated or from blocked to running, the CPU 
allocation for the process may also  change  
Threads  
• A thread is the primitive that can execute  code 
• A thread is a single sequential flow of control within a  process  
• ‘Thread ’ is also known as lightweight  process  
• A process can have many threads of  execution  Scheduled for  
Execution   Interrupted  or  
Preempted  

--- Page 115 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 18  
 
 
 
• Different threads, which are part of a 
process, share the same address space; 
meaning they share the data memory, 
code memory and heap memory  area 
• Threads maintain their own thread status 
(CPU register values), Program Counter 
(PC) and stack  
Figure 7 Memory organization of process and its associated  Threads 
The Concept of  multithreading  
Use of multiple thread s to execute a process brings the following advantage.  
• Better  memory  utilization.  
Multiple threads of the same 
process share the address space 
for data memory. This also 
reduces the complexity of inter 
thread communication since 
variables can be shared across the 
threads.  
• Since the process is split into 
different threads, when one 
thread enters a wait state, the 
CPU can be utilized by  other   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stack 
Registers  
Thread 1  
 
void main (void)  
{ 
//Create child 
thread 1 
CreateThread(NULL, 
1000,(LPTHREAD_STA 
RT_ROUTINE)  
ChildThread1,NULL, 
0, &dwThreadID);  
//Create child 
thread 2 
CreateThread(NULL, 
1000,(LPTHREAD_STA 
RT_ROUTINE)  
ChildThread2,NULL, 
0, &dwThreadID);  
}  
 
Task/Process  
 
 
Code  Memory  
 
 
Data  Memory  
Stack 
Register s 
 
Thread 2  
 
int ChildThread1 
(void) 
{ 
//Do something  
 
 
}  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stack 
Registers  
 
Thread 3  
 
int ChildThread2 
(void) 
{ 
//Do something  
 
 
} 
 
Figure 8 Process with multi -threads  
• threads of the process that do not require the event, which the other thread  is 
waiting, for processing. This speeds up the execution of the  process.  
• Efficient CPU utilization. The CPU is engaged all  time.  

--- Page 116 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 19  
 
 
 
Thread V/s Process  
 
Thread  Process  
Thread is a single unit of execution and is part 
of process.  Process is a program in execution and contains 
one or more threads.  
A thread does not have its own data memory 
and heap memory. It shares the data memory 
and heap memory with other threads of the 
same process.  Process has its own code memory, data memory 
and stack memory.  
A thread cannot live independently; it lives 
within the process.  A process contains at least one thread.  
There can be multiple threads in a process. 
The first thread (main thread) calls the main 
function and occupies the start of the stack 
memory of the process.  Threads within a process share the code, data 
and heap memory. Each thread holds separate 
memory area for stack (shares the total stack 
memory of the process).  
Threads are very inexpensive to create  Processes are very expensive to create. Involves 
many OS overhead.  
Context switching is inexpensive and fast  Context switching is complex and involves lot of 
OS overhead and is comparatively slower.  
If a thread expires, its stack is reclaimed by the 
process.  If a process dies, the resources allocated to it are 
reclaimed by the OS and all the associated 
threads of the process also dies.  
Advantages of Threads:  
1. Better memory utilization : Multiple threads of the same process share the 
address space for data memory. This also reduces the complexity of inter 
thread communication since variable s can be shared across the  threads.  
2. Efficient CPU utilization: The CPU is engaged all time.  

--- Page 117 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 20  
  
 
3. Speeds up the execution of the process: The process is split into different 
threads, when one thread enters a wait state, the CPU can be utilized by 
other threads of the process that do not require the event, which the other 
thread is waiting, for  processing.  
Multiprocessing & Multitasking  
• The ability  to execute  multiple  processes  simultaneously  is referred  as 
multiprocessing  
• Systems which are capable of performing multiprocessing are known  as 
multiprocessor systems  
• Multiprocessor systems possess multiple CPUs and can execute multiple 
processes simultaneously  
• The ability of the Operating System to have multiple programs in memory, 
which are ready for execution, is referred as  multiprogramming  
• Multitasking refers to the ability of an operating system to hold multiple 
processes in memory and switch the processor (CPU) from executing one 
process to another  process  
• Multitasking involves ‘ Context switching ’, ‘Context saving ’ and ‘ Context 
retrieval ’ 
• Context switching refers to the switching of execution context from task to 
other  
• When a task/process switching happens, the current context of execution 
should be saved to  (Context saving ) retrieve it at a later point of time when 
the CPU executes the process, which is interrupted currently due to 
execution  switching  
• During context switching, the context of the task to be executed is retrieved 
from the saved context list. This is known as Context  retrieval  

--- Page 118 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 21  
  
 
Multitasking – Context Switching:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Process  2 
 
 
Process  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
 
 
 
Types of Multitasking :  
Depending on how the task/process execution switching act is implemented, 
multitasking can is classified into  
Idle 
 
Running  
Time 
Figure 9 Context Switching  
Multiprogramming:  The ability of the Operating System to have  multiple  
programs  in memory,  which  are ready  for execution,  is referred  as 
multiprogramming.  Running  Idle Waits in ‘Ready’ Queue  Running  dy’ Queue  Waits  in ‘Re Running  Idle Delay  in execution  of 
Process 1  happened 
due to  ‘Context  
Switching’  Delay  in execution  of 
Process 2  happened 
due to  ‘Context  
Switching’  Processes  
Execution switches to Process 2  
(Interrupt or System Call)  
1. Save Current context into  PCB0  
2. Perform other OS operations related to 
‘Context Switching’  
3. Reload Context for Process 2 from  PCB1  
Execution switches to Process 1  
(Interrupt or System Call)  
1. Save Current context into  PCB1  
2. Perform other OS operations related to 
‘Context Switching’  
3. Reload Context for Process 1 from  PCB0  

--- Page 119 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 22  
  
 
• Co-operative Multitasking: Co-operative multitasking is the most primitive 
form of multitasking in which a task/process gets a chance to execute only 
when the currently executing task/process voluntarily  relinquishes the CPU. 
In this method, any task/process can avail the CPU as much time as it wants. 
Since this type of implementation involves the mercy of the tasks each other 
for getting the CPU time for execution, it is known as co -operative 
multitaskin g. If the currently executing task is non -cooperative, the other 
tasks may have to wait for a long time to get the  CPU  
• Preemptive Multitasking: Preemptive multitasking ensures that every 
task/process gets a chance to execute. When and how much time a process 
gets is dependent on the implementation of the preemptive scheduling. As 
the name indicates, in preemptive multitasking, the currently running 
task/process is preempted to give a chance to other tasks/process to execute. 
The preemption of task may be based on time slots or task/process  priority  
• Non-preemptive Multitasking: The process/task, which is currently given the 
CPU time, is allowed to execute until it terminates (enters the ‘Completed’ 
state) or enters the ‘Blocked/Wait’ state, waiting for a n I/O. The co - 
operative and non -preemptive multitasking differs in their behavior when 
they are in the ‘Blocked/Wait’ state. In co -operative multitasking, the 
currently executing process/task need not relinquish the CPU when it enters 
the ‘Blocked/Wait’ s ate, waiting for an I/O, or a shared resource access or an 
event to occur whereas in non -preemptive multitasking the currently 
executing task relinquishes the CPU when it waits for an  I/O. 
Task Scheduling:  
• In a multitasking system, there should be some mechanism in place to share 
the CPU among the different tasks and to decide which process/task is to be 
executed at a given point of  time 
• Determining which task/process is to be executed at a given point of time is 
known as task/process  scheduling  

--- Page 120 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 23  
  
 
• Task scheduling forms the basis of  multitasking  
• Scheduling policies forms the guidelines for determining which task is to be 
executed when  
• The scheduling policies are implemented in an algorithm and it is run by the 
kernel as a  service  
• The kernel service/application, which implements the scheduling algorithm, 
is known as  ‘Scheduler ’ 
• The task scheduling policy can be pre-emptive , non-preemptive or co- 
operative  
• Depending on the scheduling policy the process scheduling decision may  
take place when a process switches its state  to 
➢ ‘Ready ’ state from ‘ Running ’ state 
➢ ‘Blocked/Wait ’ state from ‘ Running ’ state 
➢ ‘Ready ’ state from ‘ Blocked/Wait ’ state 
➢ ‘Completed ’ state 
Task Scheduling - Scheduler Selection : 
The selection of a scheduling criteria/algorithm should consider  
• CPU Utilization: The scheduling algorithm should always make the CPU 
utilization high. CPU utilization is a direct measure of how much percentage 
of the CPU is being utilized.  
• Throughput: This gives an indication of the number of processes executed 
per unit of time. The throughput for a good scheduler should always be 
higher.  
• Turnaround Time: It is the amount of time taken by a process for 
completing its execution. It includes the time spent by the proce ss for 
waiting for the main memory, time spent in the ready queue, time spent on 
completing the I/O operations, and the time spent in execution. The 
turnaround time should be a minimum for a good scheduling  algorithm.  

--- Page 121 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 24  
 
         Move Process to ‘Device  Queue’  To summarize, a good scheduling algorithm has high CPU utilization, minimum 
Turn Around Time (TAT), maximum throughput and lea st response time.   
 
• Waiting Time: It is th e amount of time spent by a process in the ‘ Ready ’ 
queue waiting to get the CPU time for execution. The waiting time should be 
minimal for a good scheduling  algorithm.  
• Response Time: It is the time elapsed between the subm ission of a process 
and the first response. For a good scheduling algorithm, the response time 
should be as least as  possible.  
 
Task Scheduling - Queues  
The various queues maintained by OS in association with CPU scheduling are  
• Job Queue: Job queue contains all the processes in the  system  
• Ready Queue: Contains all the processes, which are ready for execution and 
waiting for CPU to get their turn for execution. The Ready queue is empty 
when there is no process ready for  running.  
• Device Queue: Contains the set of processes, which are waiting for an I/O 
device  
Task Scheduling – Task transition through v arious Queues  
 
 
 
 
 
Scheduler  
 
 
Process   
 
 
 
to ‘Ready’  queue  Process  
 
 
 
Device 
Manager  
    
 
 
 
 
CPU  
 
 
 
 
 
Process   
 
 
Run Process 
to Completion  
 
Figure 10. Process TranDesviicteiQouneuethrough various queues 
Resource Request 
By Process   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Admitted   Process 1  
 Process 2  
Process 3  
Process 4  
-----------------  
Process n  
Job Queue  
 
 Process  1 
  
 Process 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Move I/O C 
Process to  ‘R  Process n  
Ready Queue  
Move preempted process  
 
 
ompleted 
eady’ queue  
 Process 1  
Process 2  
Process n  
 

--- Page 122 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 25  
 P1  
P2 P3  
 
Non-preemptive scheduling – First Come First Served (FCFS)/First In 
First Out (FIFO) Scheduling : 
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the order in which they  enters 
the ‘Ready ’ queue  
• The first entered process is serviced  first 
• It is same as any real world application where queue systems are used;  E.g. 
Ticketing  
Drawbacks:  
➢ Favors monopoly of process. A process, which does not contain any  I/O 
operation, continues its execution until it finishes its  task 
➢ In general, FCFS favors CPU bound processes and I/O bound processes may 
have to wait until the completion of CPU bound process, if the currently 
executing process is a CPU bound process. This le ads to poor device 
utilization.  
➢ The average waiting time is not minimal for FCFS scheduling  algorithm  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) 
for each process and the Average waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes).  
Solution: The sequence of execution of the processes by the  CPU is represented as  
 
0 10 15 22 
10 5 7 

--- Page 123 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 26  
  
 
Assuming the CPU is readily available at the time of arrival of P1, P1 starts 
executing without any waiting in the ‘Ready’ queue. Hence the waiting time for P1 
is zero.  
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first)  
Waiting Time for P2 = 10 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 15 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P2) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3  
= (0+10+15)/3 = 25/3 = 8.33 milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 10 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue +  
Execution Time)  
 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 =  15 ms (-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 =  22 ms (-Do-) 
Average Turn Around Time= (Turn Around Time for all processes) / No. of  
Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3  
= (10+15+22)/3 = 47/3  
= 15.66 milliseconds  
Non-preemptive scheduling – Last Come First Served (LCFS)/Last In 
First Out (LIFO) Scheduling:  
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the order in which they  are 
entered in the ‘ Ready ’ queue  
• The last entered process is serviced  first 

--- Page 124 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 27  
  
 
• LCFS scheduling is also known as Last In First Out (LIFO) where the 
process, which is put last into the ‘ Ready ’ queue, is serviced  first 
Drawbacks:  
➢ Favors monopoly of process. A process, which does not contain any I/O 
operation, continues its execution until it finishes its  task 
➢ In general, LCFS favors CPU bound processes and I/O bound processes may 
have to wait until the completion of CPU bound process, if the currently 
executing process is a CPU bound process. This leads to poor device 
utilization.  
➢ The average waiting time is not minimal for LCF S scheduling  algorithm  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3 (Assume only P1 is present in the ‘ Ready ’ queue when the 
scheduler picks up it and P2, P3 entered ‘ Ready ’ queue after that). Now a new 
process P4 with estimated completion time 6ms enters the ‘Ready’ queue after 5ms 
of scheduling P1. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) for 
each process and the A verage waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes).Assume all the processes contain only 
CPU operation and no I/O operations are  involved.  
Solution: Initially there is only P1 available in the Ready queue and the scheduling 
sequence will be P1, P3, P2. P4 enters the queue during the execution of P1 and 
becomes the last process entered the ‘ Ready ’ queue. Now the order of execution 
changes to P1, P4, P3, and P2 as given below.  

--- Page 125 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 28  
  
 
P1  
P4  
P3  
P2 
0 10 16 23 28 
10 6 7 5 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first)  
Waiting Time for P4 = 5 ms (P4 starts executing after completing P1. But P4 
arrived after 5ms of execution of P1. Hence its waiting time = Execution start time  
– Arrival Time = 10 -5 = 5) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 16 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P4) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 23 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1, P4 and P3) 
Average  waiting  time = (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of  Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4  
= (0 + 5 + 1 6 + 23)/4 = 44/4  
= 11 milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 =  10 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 =  11 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue  + 
Execution Time = (Execution Start Time – Arrival 
Time) + Estimated Exec ution Time =  (10 -5) + 6 = 5 +  6) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 =  23 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 =  28 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time)  
Average Turn Around Time = ( Turn Around Time for all processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4  
= (10+11+23+28)/4 = 72/4  
= 18 milliseconds  

--- Page 126 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 29  
  
 
Non-preemptive scheduling – Shortest Job First (SJF) Scheduling . 
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the execution completion time 
for tasks  
• The average waiting time for a given set of processes is minimal in SJF 
scheduling  
• Optimal compared to other non -preemptive scheduling like  FCFS  
Drawbacks:  
➢ A process whose estimated execution completion time is high may not get a 
chance to execute if more and more processes with least estimated execution 
time enters the ‘ Ready ’ queue before the process with longest estimated 
execution time starts its  execution  
➢ May lead to the ‘Starvation’ of processes with high estima ted completion 
time 
➢ Difficult to know in advance the next shortest process in the ‘ Ready ’ queue 
for scheduling since new processes with different estimated execution time 
keep entering the ‘ Ready ’ queue at any point of  time.  
Non-preemptive scheduling – Priority based Scheduling  
• A priority, which is unique or same is associated with each  task 
• The priority of a task is expressed in different ways, like a priority number, 
the time required to complete the execution  etc. 
• In number based priority  assignment the priority is a number ranging from 0 
to the maximum priority supported by the OS. The maximum level of 
priority is OS  dependent.  
• Windows CE supports 256 levels of priority (0 to 255 priority numbers, with 
0 being the highest  priority)  

--- Page 127 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 30  
  
 
• The priority is assigned to the task on creating it. It can also be changed 
dynamically (If the Operating System supports this  feature)  
• The non -preemptive priority based scheduler sorts the ‘Ready’ queue based 
on the priority and picks the process with the highest level of priority for 
execution  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds and priorities 0, 3, 2 (0 - highest priority, 3 
lowest priority) respectively enters  the ready queue together. Calculate the waiting 
time and Turn Around Time (TAT) for each process and the Average waiting time 
and Turn Around Time (Assuming there is no I/O waiting for the processes) in 
priority based scheduling algorithm.  
Solution: The scheduler sorts the ‘ Ready ’ queue based on the priority and 
schedules the process with the highest priority (P1 with priority number 0) first and 
the next high priority process (P3 with priority number 2) as second and so on. The 
order in whi ch the processes are scheduled for execution is represented as  
 
 
P1  
P3  
P2 
0 10 17 22 
10 7 5 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first)  
Waiting Time for P3 = 10 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 17 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1 and P3) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P1+P3+P2)) / 3  

--- Page 128 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 31  
  
 
= (0+10+17)/3 = 27/3  
= 9 milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 10 ms ( Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 =  17 ms (-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 =  22 ms (-Do-) 
Average Turn Around Time= (Turn Around Time fo r all processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P3+P2)) / 3  
= (10+17+22)/3 = 49/3  
= 16.33 milliseconds  
 
Drawbacks:  
➢ Similar to SJF scheduling algorithm, non -preemptive priority based 
algorithm also possess the drawback of ‘ Starvation ’ where a process whose 
priority is low may not get a chance to execute if more and more processes 
with higher priorities enter the ‘ Ready ’ queue before the process with lower 
priority starts its  execution.  
➢ ‘Starvation ’ can be effectively tackled  in priority based non -preemptive 
scheduling by dynamically raising the priority of the low priority 
task/process which is under starvation (waiting in the ready queue for a 
longer time for getting the CPU  time)  
➢ The technique of gradually raising the priority of processes which are 
waiting in the ‘Ready’ queue as time progresses, for preventing ‘ Starvation ’, 
is known as  ‘Aging ’. 

--- Page 129 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 32  
  
 
Preemptive scheduling:  
• Employed in systems, which implements preemptive multitasking  model  
• Every task in the  ‘Ready ’ queue gets a chance to execute. When and how 
often each process gets a chance to execute (gets the CPU time) is dependent 
on the type of preemptive scheduling algorithm used for scheduling the 
processes  
• The scheduler can preempt (stop temporarily)  the currently executing 
task/process and select another task from the ‘ Ready ’ queue for  execution  
• When to pre -empt a task and which task is to be picked up from the ‘ Ready ’ 
queue for execution after preempting the current task is purely dependent on 
the scheduling  algorithm  
• A task which is preempted by the scheduler is moved to the ‘ Ready ’ queue. 
The act of moving a ‘ Running ’ process/task into the ‘ Ready ’ queue by the 
scheduler, without the processes requesting for it is known as  ‘Preemption ’ 
• Time -based preemption and priority -based preemption are the two important 
approaches adopted in preemptive  scheduling  
Preemptive scheduling – Preemptive SJF Scheduling/  Shortest  Remaining 
Time  (SRT):  
• The non preemptive SJF scheduling algorithm sorts the ‘R eady’ queue only 
after the current process completes execution or enters wait state, whereas 
the preemptive SJF scheduling algorithm sorts the ‘Ready’ queue when a 
new process enters the ‘Ready’ queue and checks whether the execution 
time of the new proces s is shorter than the remaining of the total estimated 
execution time of the currently executing  process  
• If the execution time of the new process is less, the currently executing 
process is preempted and the new process is scheduled for  execution  

--- Page 130 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 33  
 
 
 
• Always compares the execution completion time (ie the remaining execution 
time for the new process) of a new process entered the ‘Ready’ queue with 
the remaining time for completion of the currently executing process and 
schedules the proc ess with shortest remaining time for  execution.  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together. 
A new process P4 with estimated completion time 2ms enters the ‘Ready’ queue 
after 2ms. Assume all the processes contain only CPU operation and no I/O 
operations are involved.  
Solution: At the beginning, there are only three processes (P1, P2 and P3) 
available in the ‘ Ready ’ queue and th e SRT scheduler picks up the process with the 
Shortest remaining time for execution completion (In this example P2 with 
remaining time 5ms) for scheduling. Now process P4 with estimated execution 
completion time 2ms enters the ‘ Ready ’ queue after 2ms of st art of execution of 
P2. The processes are re -scheduled for execution in the following  order  
 
 
 
P2  
P4  
P2  
P3  
P1 
 
0 2 4 7 14 24 
2 2 3 7 10 
 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as  
Waiting Time for P2 = 0 ms + (4 -2) ms = 2ms (P2 starts executing first and  is 
interrupted by P4 and has to wait till the completion of 
P4 to get the next CPU slot)  
Waiting Time for P4 =  0 ms (P4 starts executing by preempting P2 since  the 
execution time for completion of P4 (2ms) is less 
than that of the Remaining time for execution 
completion of P2 (Here it is 3ms))  
Waiting Time for P3 = 7 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P4 and P2)  

--- Page 131 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 34  
 
 
 
Waiting Time for P1 = 14 ms (P1 starts executing after completing P4, P2 and P3) 
Average waiting tim e = (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P4+P2+P3+P1)) / 4  
= (0 + 2 + 7 + 14)/4 = 23/4  
= 5.75 milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 =  7 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 = 2 ms  
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time = (Execution Start Time – Arrival 
Time) + Estimated Execution Time = (2 -2) + 2)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 =  14 ms (Time  spent  in Ready  Queue  + 
Execution Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 =  24 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue  + 
Execution Time)  
Average Turn  Around  Time  = (Turn Around Time for all the processes) / No. of  Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P2+P4+P3+P1)) / 4  
= (7+2+14+24)/4 = 47/4  
 
= 11.75 milliseconds  
Preemptive scheduling – Round Robin (RR) 
Scheduling:   
 
 
 
 
Execution  Switch   
Process  1  
 
 
 
Execution Switch  
• Each  process  in the ‘Ready’  queue  is 
executed for a pre -defined time  slot.  
 
Process  4 Process 2  
 
• The execution starts with picking up the first 
process in the ‘Ready’ queue. It is executed for a 
pre-defined  time  
 
Execution  Switch   
 
 
 
 
Process  3  
Execution Switch  
 
Figure 11 Round Robin Scheduling  

--- Page 132 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 35  
 
 
 
• When the pre -defined time elapses or the process completes (before the pre - 
defined time slice), the next process in the ‘Ready’ queue is selected for 
execution.  
• This is repeated for all the processes in the ‘ Ready’  queue  
• Once each process in the ‘Ready’ queue is executed for the pre -defined time 
period, the scheduler comes back and picks the first process in the ‘Ready’ 
queue again for execution.  
• Round Robin scheduling is similar to the FCFS scheduling and the only 
difference is that a time slice based preemption is added to switch the 
execution between the processes in the ‘Ready’  queue  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 6, 4, 2 milliseconds re spectively, enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) 
for each process and the Average waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes) in RR algorit hm with Time slice= 2ms.  
Solution: The scheduler sorts the ‘ Ready ’ queue based on the FCFS policy and 
picks up the first process P1 from the ‘Ready’ queue and executes it for the time 
slice 2ms. When the time slice is expired, P1 is preempted and P2 is sch eduled for 
execution. The Time slice expires after 2ms of execution of P2. Now P2 is 
preempted and P3 is picked up for execution. P3 completes its execution within the 
time slice and the scheduler picks P1 again for execution for the next time slice. 
This procedure is repeated till all the processes are serviced. The order in which the 
processes are scheduled for execution is represented as  
 
 
P1  
P2  
P3  
P1  
P2  
P1 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
2 2 2 2 2 2 

--- Page 133 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 36  
  
 
 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as  
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 + (6 -2) + (10 -8) = 0+4+2= 6ms (P1 starts executing first  
and waits for two time slices to get execution back and 
again 1 time slice for getting CPU time)  
Waiting Time for P2 = (2 -0) + (8 -4) = 2+4 = 6ms (P2 st arts executing after P1  
executes for 1 time slice and waits for two time 
slices to get the CPU time)  
Waiting Time for P3 = (4 -0) = 4ms (P3 starts executing after completing the first 
time slices for P1 and P2 and completes its execution in a single time s lice.)  
Average  waiting  time = (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of  Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3  
= (6+6+4)/3 =  16/3 
= 5.33  milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 =  12 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 =  10 ms (-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 =  6 ms (-Do-) 
Average Turn  Around  Time  = (Turn Around Time for all the processes) /  No. of Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3  
= (12+10+6)/3 = 28/3  
= 9.33 milliseconds.  

--- Page 134 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 37  
 
 
 
Preemptive scheduling – Priority based Scheduling  
• Same as that of the non-preemptive priority based scheduling except for the 
switching of execution between  tasks  
• In preemptive priority based scheduling, any high priority process entering 
the ‘Ready’ queue is immediately scheduled for execution whereas in the 
non-preemptive scheduling any high priority process entering the ‘Ready’ 
queue is scheduled only after the currently executing proc ess completes its 
execution or only when it voluntarily releases the  CPU  
• The priority of a task/process in preemptive priority based scheduling is 
indicated in the same way as that of the mechanisms adopted for non- 
preemptive multitasking.  
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds and priorities 1, 3, 2 (0 - highest priority, 3 
lowest priority) respectively enters the ready queue together. A new process P4 
with estimated completi on time 6ms and priority 0 enters the ‘Ready’ queue after 
5ms of start of execution of P1. Assume all the processes contain only CPU 
operation and no I/O operations are involved.  
Solution: At the beginning, there are only three processes (P1, P2 and P3) 
available in the ‘ Ready ’ queue and the scheduler picks up the process with the 
highest priority (In this example P1 with priority 1) for scheduling. Now process 
P4 with estimated execution completion time 6ms and priority 0 enters the ‘ Ready ’ 
queue after 5ms  of start of execution of P1. The processes are re -scheduled for 
execution in the following  order  
 
 
P1  
P4  
P1  
P3  
P2 
 
0 5 11 16 
5 6 5 7 23 28 
5 

--- Page 135 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 38  
  
 
 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as  
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 + (11 -5) = 0+6 =6 ms (P1 starts executing first and gets  
Preempted by P4 after 5ms and again gets the CPU  time 
after completion of  P4) 
Waiting Time for P4 = 0 ms (P4 starts executing immediately on entering t he 
‘Ready’ queue, by preempting P1)  
Waiting Time for P3 = 16 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P4) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 23 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1, P4 and P3) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Waiting time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4  
= (6 + 0 + 16 + 23)/4 = 45/4  
= 11.25 milliseconds  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 16 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time)  
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 = 6ms ( Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution  Time  
= (Execution Start Time – Arrival Time) + Estimated Execution Time = (5 -5) + 6 = 0 + 6)  
 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 23 ms ( Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 28 ms ( Time spent in Ready Queue + Ex ecution Time) 
Average Turn Around Time= ( Turn Around Time for all the processes) / No. of Processes  
= (Turn Around Time for (P2+P4+P3+P1)) / 4  
= (16+6+23+28)/4 = 73/4  
= 18.25 milliseconds  

--- Page 136 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 39  
 
 
 
How to chose RTOS:  
 The decision of an RTOS for an embedded design is very  critical.  
 A lot of factors need to be analyzed carefully before making a decision  on 
the selection of an  RTOS.  
These factors can be either  
1. Functional  
2. Non-functional requirements.  
1. Functional Requirements:  
1. Processor  support:  
It is not necessary that all RTOS’s support all kinds of processor 
architectures.  
It is essential to ensure the processor support by the RTOS  
2. Memory Requirements:  
• The RTOS requires ROM memory for holding the OS files and it is 
normally stored in a non -volatile memory like  FLASH.  
OS also requires working memory RAM for loading the OS service.  
Since embedded systems are memory constrained, it is essential to evaluate 
the minimal RAM and ROM requirements for the OS under considerat ion. 
3. Real-Time  Capabilities:  
 It is not mandatory that the OS for all embedded systems need to be Real - 
Time and all embedded OS’s are ‘Real -Time’ in  behavior.  
 The Task/process scheduling policies plays an important role in the Real - 
Time behavior of an  OS. 


--- Page 137 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 40  
 
 
 
3. Kernel and Interrupt Latency:  
 The kernel of the OS may disable interrupts while executing certain  services 
and it may lead to interrupt  latency.  
 For an embedded system whose response requirements are high,  this latency 
should be minimal.  
5. Inter process Communication (IPC) and Task Synchronization: The 
implementation of IPC and Synchronization is OS kernel  dependent.  
6. Modularization  Support:  
Most of the OS’s provide a bunch of features.  
It is very useful if the OS supports modularization where in which the 
developer can choose the essential modules and re -compile the OS image for 
functioning.  
7. Support for Networking and  Communication:  
The OS kernel may provide stack implementation and driver support for a 
bunc h of communication interfaces and networking.  
Ensure that the OS under consideration provides support for all the 
interfaces required by the embedded product.  
8. Development Language Support:  
Certain OS’s include the run time libraries required for running ap plications 
written in languages like JAVA and C++.  
The OS may include these components as built -in component, if not , check 
the availability of the same from a third party.  


--- Page 138 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 41  
 
 
 
2. Non -Functional Requirements:  
1. Custom Developed or Off the  Shelf:  
 It is possible to go for the complete development of an OS suiting the 
embedded system needs or use an off the shelf, readily available  OS. 
It may be possible to build the required features by customizing an open 
source OS.  
The decision on which to select is purely dependent on the development  
cost, licensing fees for the OS, development time and availability of skilled 
resources.  
2. Cost:  
The total cost for developing or buying the OS and maintaining it in terms of 
commercial p roduct and custom build needs to be evaluated before taking a 
decision on the selection of OS.  
3. Development and Debugging tools Availability:  
The availability of development and debugging tools is a critical decision 
making factor in the selection of an OS for embedded design.  
Certain OS’s may be superior in performance, but the availability of tools  
for supporting the development may be  limited.  
4. Ease of  Use: 
How easy it is to use a commercial RTOS is another important feature that 
needs to be considered in the RTOS selection.  
5. After  Sales:  
 For a commercial embedded RTOS, after sales in the form of e -mail, on-call 
services etc. for bug fixes, critical patch updates and support for production 
issues etc. should be analyzed  thoroughly.  


--- Page 139 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 42  
 
User Level  Applications/Tasks  
App 1 App 2 App 3 
Operating System Services 
(Kernel)  
Device Drivers  
Hardware   
 
Device Drivers:  
• Device driver is a piece of software that acts as a bridge between  the 
operating system and the  hardware  
• The user applications talk to the OS kernel for all necessary information 
exchange including communication with the hardware  peripherals  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• The architecture of the OS kernel will not allow direct device access from 
the user  application  
• All the device related access should flow through the OS kernel and the  OS 
kernel routes it to the concerned hardware  peripheral  
• OS Provides interfaces in the form of Application Programming  Interfaces 
(APIs) for accessing the  hardware  
• The device driver abstracts the hardware from user  applications  

--- Page 140 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 43  
  
 
• Device  drivers  are responsible  for initiating  and managing  the 
communication with the hardware  peripherals  
• Drivers which comes as part of the Operating system image is kn own as 
‘built -in drivers’ or ‘onboard’ drivers. Eg. NAND FLASH  driver  
• Drivers which needs to be installed on the fly for communicating with add - 
on devices are known as ‘Installable  drivers’  
• For installable drivers, the driver is loaded on a need basis when the  device 
is present and it is unloaded when the device is  removed/detached  
• The ‘Device  Manager  service of the OS kernel is responsible for  loading 
and unloading the driver, managing the driver  etc. 
• The underlying implementation of device drive r is OS kernel  dependent  
• The driver communicates with the kernel is dependent on the OS  structure 
and implementation.  
• Device drivers can run on either user space or kernel  space  
• Device drivers which run in user space are known as user mode drivers and 
the drivers which run in kernel space are known as kernel mode  drivers  
• User mode drivers are safer than kernel mode  drivers  
• If an error or exception occurs in a user mode driver, it won’t affect the 
services of the  kernel  
• If an exception occurs in the kernel mode driver, it may lead to the  kernel 
crash  
• The way how a device driver is written and how the interrupts are handled  in 
it are Operating system and target hardware  specific.  
• The device driver implements the  following:  
• Device (Hardware) Initialization and Interrupt configuration  

--- Page 141 ---
                   ES Unit-5 Notes   
N Suresh, Assistant Professor, Dept. of ECE, MRCET  Page 44  
  
 
• Interrupt handling and  processing  
• Client interfacing (Interfacing with user  applications)  
• The basic Interrupt configuration involves the  following.  
• Set the interrupt type (Edge Triggered (Rising/F alling) or Level  Triggered 
(Low or High)), enable the interrupts and set the interrupt  priorities.  
• The processor identifies an interrupt through  IRQ.  
• IRQs are generated by the Interrupt  Controller.  
• Register an Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) with an Interrupt Request  (IRQ).  
• When an interrupt occurs, depending on its priority, it is serviced and  the 
corresponding ISR is  invoked  
• The processing part of an interrupt is handled in an  ISR 
• The whole interrupt processing can be done by the ISR itself or by  invoking 
an Interrupt Service Thread  (IST)  
• The IST performs interrupt processing on behalf of the  ISR 
• It is always advised to use an IST for interrupt processing, to make the ISR 
compact and  short  
Reference Books:  
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K .V Mc Graw  Hill 
2. Embedded System Design -Raj Kamal  TMH  
