
--- Page 1 ---
Embedded Systems Security
Practical Methods for Safe and Secure Software
and Systems Development
David Kleidermacher
Mike Kleidermacher
AMSTERDAM  BOSTON  HEIDELBERG  LONDON  NEW YORK  OXFORD
PARIS  SAN DIEGO  SAN FRANCISCO  SINGAPORE  SYDNEY  TOKYO
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier

--- Page 2 ---
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
First published 2012Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information
about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangement with organizations such as the
Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.
elsevier.com/permissions .
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broad enour
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating
and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using suchinformation or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, includingparties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideascontained in the material herein.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Number: 2012931463
ISBN: 978-0-12-386886-2
For information on all Newnes publications visit our
website at www.elsevierdirect.com
Printed and bound in the United States
1 21 31 41 5 1 0987654321


--- Page 3 ---
Foreword
At last! Finally, a book about building secure embedded systems.
Read the newspaper and you get an almost daily litany of stories about leaks and exploits.
Credit card numbers seem to leap out of databases. Personal information spews from corporateservers.
But the elephant in the room, the real threat vector, has been largely ignored. For every PC in
the world, there are hundreds of embedded systems, interconnected via an ever-growing arrayof communications channels. WiFi, Bluetooth, Ethernet, RFID, FireWired the list is endless.
A smartphone has at least four antennas and reﬂashable memory, and, if compromised, couldbe an electronic Typhoid Mary.
Anything with a connection can be a threat vector. A USB toothbrush (yes, at least one is on the
market) might carry both biological and computational infectious elements. As can a smartmousepad (which uses the connection to display custom pictures). That WiFi electronic pictureframe showing cute photos of your loved ones may have a wicked heart as it poisons theneighbor’s network.
Consider that some automobiles currently have brake-by-wire. Tractors have had steer-by-wire
for some time; the steering wheel merely spins an encoder, and that technology will certainlymake it into cars. But consumers want Internet connections at work, at play, and on the road.How hard will it be for a bad guy halfway around the world to bring the I-5 to a disastrouscrunch by issuing TCP/IP packets?
Not hard at all, apparently. Researchers have already taken control of cars using a variety of
vectors.
Engineers at the DHS destroyed a large diesel generator by inﬁltrating it remotely. Stuxnet
showed that a boring old SCADA control system could be a state-sponsored weapon. SCADAsystems control power plants, factories, and, well, just about any industrial process. A sewageplant in Queensland was successfully attacked, causing it to leak noxious goop over a widearea. The Feds admit that foreign states have inﬁltrated the USA’s aging power grid, perhapsleaving behind rogue code.
xi

--- Page 4 ---
What happens when the grid becomes smart?
At least one company sells bearings that use a magnetic ﬁeld to suspend a shaft; a DSP
performs some 15,000 calculations per second to keep things running smoothly. And thebearing controllers have Ethernet connections! A coordinated attack on bearingsd bearings!d
could cripple manufacturing.
Internet-connected toasters are on the market, as are networked coffee makers. When 100
million bleary-eyed, and possibly hung over, Americans wake one Monday morning and ﬁndtheir caffeine ﬁx unavailable, business will come to a standstill. But the truth is they’ll still beblissfully sleeping since a teenager in Nigeria reset all the alarm clocks.
There’s another security issue: non-malware bugs. As embedded systems become increasingly
part of the fabric of civilization, any bug that compromises the reliability of a system canbecome a mission-critical security threat. When the automated jail control doors fail to close,the prison becomes a hotel. And not Hotel California, because the guests are sure to check out.A task that errantly consumes too many resources (like memory) or CPU cycles can preventother activities from running. The trafﬁc light fails to turn red, the railroad signal remains open,or the ATM’s bill counter fails to stop spewing money (one can hope).
Most embedded systems developers have little training in security and are largely unaware of
both the threats and the techniques and technologies needed to make their creations robust. Forthe ﬁrst time, there’s a book on the subject. Dave and Mike Kleidermacher clearly describe theissues and offer a ﬁve-point “Principles of High Assurance Software Engineering” guide. Needa clear but complete description of encryption techniques? Or details about protecting data?There’s a lavishly illustrated chapter on each.
Many developers are resigned to building insecure systems, ﬁguring the enemy will always be
one-step ahead. And embedded systems aren’t upgraded every 15 minutes, like PCs are, soimproved defenses always lag new attacks. But Dave and Mike show that it is indeed possibleto build embedded software that is inherently secure.
The authors don’t claim that making secure embedded systems is easy. In some cases even the
tools themselves must be evaluated and qualiﬁed. But secure ﬁrmware will be both a nationalpriority and a competitive advantage. This book offers answers. I hope it serves as a wake-upcall as well.
Jack Gansslexii Foreword

--- Page 5 ---
Preface
About this Book
The goal of this book is to help embedded systems developers improve the security and
reliability of their products. While several books target embedded systems security,the subject matter of these works has been rather narrow, focusing almost exclusivelyon hardware-related issues and/or network security protocols and their underlyingcryptography. In contrast, Embedded Systems Security aims for a comprehensive, systems
view of security: hardware, platform software (such as operating systems and hypervisors),software development process, data protection protocols (both networking and storage), andcryptography. While no title can realistically cover every embedded systems security topic,this book does attempt to address the major security-relevant building blocks ofcontemporary embedded systems.
The reader will gain a solid understanding of the critical systems software and hardware
issues that must be considered when designing secure embedded systems. Most embeddedsystems developers do not write their own operating systems and network protocols, nor dothey design their own microprocessors. Therefore, a proﬁcient knowledge in the security-relevant aspects of these platform components is critical to making good embedded designchoices, particularly with respect to meeting security objectives given a particular operatingenvironment.
The reader will learn an efﬁcient methodology for developing secure embedded software. In
addition to properly utilizing platform components, embedded developers must design theirown software and integrate the overall system in such a manner as to ensure the highestpossible levels of security. Thus, an important goal of this book is to discuss proven andpractical techniques for developing secure software. We also seek to debunk the myth that itis not possible to dramatically increase software assurance without a commensurate growthin development time and cost. The methodology presented is derived from a combinationof industry standards and practical experience. It is our belief that embedded systemsdevelopers are sorely lacking in high-quality literary guidance in this area. We aim to ﬁllthat gap.
xiii

--- Page 6 ---
Audience
Embedded Systems Security is written primarily for engineering professionals involved in the
development of embedded systems. Hardware, software, and systems engineers and architects
all have a hand in embedded systems security.
One of the most important tenets of computer security is that it is difﬁcult, unwise, and often
ﬁnancially and/or technically infeasible to retroﬁt security capability to a system that was notoriginally designed for it. Therefore, the only hope for improving security across the world ofembedded systems is to educate the developers, who must learn to think about security issuesas much as they already think about functionality, memory footprint, and debugging.
This book also provides an important reference for professionals involved in the testing and
quality assurance of embedded systems. These engineers must learn to test for securitystrength, a challenge that is inherently more difﬁcult than testing against a functionalityspeciﬁcation because the scope of potential security threats is often difﬁcult, if not impossible,to fully enumerate. Security testing requires tremendous creativity and determination. Yet thereare many tools that the quality control engineer can bring to bear on the problem, and a keyfocus of this book is to provide practical instruction regarding this toolbox.
Concern about building secure embedded systems must permeate the organization. Developer
training must include books like this, attendance at technical conferences with securityinstruction, training from key suppliers of hardware and software to a project, and regularexposure to pertinent current events. Thus, this book is intended for the management teamsresponsible for making sure that developers design for security. Management must understandembedded security issues and be sold into the need for this training. In the example of theautomobile, this book is relevant to managers responsible for individual components, such asan infotainment system and integration of those components (e.g., major tier 1 suppliers andthe automobile manufacturers themselves), as well as the overall success of the product.Indeed, the VPs, GMs, and ofﬁcers of businesses building cars, aircraft, trains, industrialcontrol systems, or any other kind of electronic product with signiﬁcant embedded systemscontent will beneﬁt from reading this book and keeping it on the shelf for reference.
In addition to security-concerned professionals, this book provides guidance to developers
of reliability-critical embedded systems, including life-critical medical devices, avionicsand other transportation systems, telecommunications systems, and even high-volume,sophisticated consumer devices such as smartphones. There is tremendous commonality acrossrequirements for building secure, safe, and reliable embedded systems.
Finally, many of the security concepts in this book, especially software development practices,
are relevant to the engineering professional beyond the embedded systems ﬁeld. For example,this book teaches the web application developer to be concerned not only with scripting anddatabase vulnerabilities, but also with a comprehensive understanding of how the web serverxiv Preface

--- Page 7 ---
could impact security of the operating system, other applications, and the underlying computer
hardware (and vice versa).
The relative seniority of engineers and architects reading this book is irrelevant. This book is
equally useful for the entry-level programmer as well as the most seasoned developer who mayhave relatively light experience with security issues. Even engineers with signiﬁcant securitybackground and knowledge are likely to ﬁnd the guidance in this book a useful addition to theirarsenal.
While not written in textbook style, Embedded Systems Security will beneﬁt academic
instructors and students who are teaching or learning about embedded systems within
a computer science or engineering regimen. While embedded systems development is a sorelylacking discipline in the world’s technical colleges, embedded security instruction ispractically non-existent.
Organization
We recommend all readers process all chapters sequentially from beginning to end. For thosepressed for time (who isn’t?), we provide the following guidance to help prioritize materialrelative to job function.
Chapter 1, “Introduction to Embedded Systems Security,” discusses the trends driving the need
for improved security in embedded systems and then provides foundational deﬁnitions forthreats and the corresponding protective policies to counter them. In essence, we take thedistinct notions of security and embedded systems and summarize their intersection within themodern embedded system. Chapter 1 also provides sample applications of the securityconcepts and guidance in some of the most exciting, growing, and important new embeddedsystems technology areas, including smartphones and the smart grid, as a foretelling of how therest of the book may apply to current and future projects. This chapter is stronglyrecommended for all audiences.
Chapter 2, “Systems Software Considerations,” provides a comprehensive discussion of
security concerns and recommended best practices related to platform software, includingoperating systems, hypervisors, and the Multiple Independent Levels of Security (MILS)architecture. This chapter also discusses key security concerns and recommended bestpractices related to overall system security architectures and impacts of available hardwarecapabilities, such as MMUs, IOMMUs, and virtualization acceleration. This chapter is mostimportant for engineers, architects, and technical managers.
Chapter 3, “Secure Embedded Software Development,” is dedicated to maximizing assurance
of embedded software. Key principles and guidance are provided throughout and hence thechapter is most critical for software developers and their technical management.Preface xv

--- Page 8 ---
Chapter 4, “Embedded Cryptography,” provides an overview of the most important
cryptographic algorithms, key management, and related U.S. government guidance facingembedded systems. In addition to this general coverage, we discuss cryptographic concepts inthe context of embedded systems and their unique constraints and requirements. Any readerlacking a ﬁrm grounding in cryptography should read this chapter. Even if current projects donot make use of cryptographic functionality, there is a strong probability that future projectswill. Encryption and authentication form the backbone of all data conﬁdentiality and networkaccess protections.
Chapter 5, “Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems,” covers the most important,
widespread network security protocols, such as IPsec and Transport Layer Security (TLS), aswell as storage encryption approaches, and emphasizes implementation concerns for resource-constrained embedded systems. This chapter is suggested for professionals looking for anintroduction to or a refresher on the latest security protocol standards and revisions. One of thecore goals of this chapter is to help developers make intelligent decisions regarding the systemslayer (network and storage) at which to apply security. This chapter also includes advancedtopics, such as network timing channels, that will be of interest to readers looking to protect theconﬁdentiality of high-value resources.
Chapter 6, “Emerging Applications,” provides extended case studies that build upon and
apply the concepts of the preceding chapters. The discussion covers the security concerns andsample solution architectures for a handful of emerging applications and environments.Chapter 6 is recommended for all audiences.
Approach
The authors use concrete metrics and historical events to introduce the reader to the growingneed for improved security and the challenges likely to be faced during next generationembedded systems projects. Throughout the course of discussion, we present critical issuesfollowed by practical and simple advice on how to approach them. Nuggets of wisdom(Key Points ) are set apart from the rest of the prose with special typeface and summarized at the
ends of chapters. The chapter summaries act as a quick reference guide that will give readersan effective way to use the book throughout their careers. The book is not intended as a one-time-read.
We make generous use of real case studies, both from the authors’ personal experience as well
as from the authors’ extensive knowledge of the embedded security world.
Since so many systems security concerns are architectural in nature, the book contains
numerous technical diagrams to help explain concepts. For example, a case study of a radiodesign includes a set of diagrams to explain the cryptography and key management approachesused to achieve the desired security result.xvi Preface

--- Page 9 ---
Source code examples are provided to demonstrate the secure embedded software development
techniques covered in the book (especially Chapter 3).
While the book covers much ground in the area of embedded systems security, it does this by
focusing on the issues most likely to affect the modern embedded systems designer andavoiding too broad a discussion of introductory topics. For example, the network securitydiscussion in Chapter 5 give focuses more on the most recent versions of protocols andalgorithms and less on the basics of network security. Nor does Chapter 5 attempt to providea comprehensive list of protocols and algorithms. Rather, the reader is referred to sources formore basic overview material. In this sense, the book should generally be thought of as anintermediate-level approach, not overly introductory or exceedingly advanced. We feel thatthis approach is best suited for the general embedded systems readership.Preface xvii

--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Guy Broadfoot for his contribution of the Model Driven
Development section in Chapter 3.
The authors would like to thank Jack Ganssle for writing the book’s Foreword and for his
review and feedback.
The authors would like to thank Michael Barr for his review, feedback, and contribution of the
Netrino Embedded C Coding Standard discussed as a case study in Chapter 3.
The authors would like to thank Thomas Cantrell, Jack Greenbaum, Dan Hettena, and PhilippaHopcroft for their thoughtful review and feedback.
The authors would like to thank Elsevier editors Tim Pitts and Charlotte Kent for their support
throughout the project.
The authors would like to thank Tamara Kleidermacher, the book’s illustrator, who
painstakingly created the diagrams throughout this work. The ability to add visualization to aida technical discussion is critical, and Tamara’s ﬂair for visual style and consistency hasimproved this book immeasurably.
Mike would like to thank his son Dave for the invitation to co-author this work.Mike would like to thank Ellwood (Chip) McGrogan who “taught me all I know about
cryptography.”
David would like to thank his family dTamara, Hannah, and Aaron dfor their constant support
and extraordinary patience during the writing of this book over a great many nights and
weekends.
David would like to thank his brother Paul for being a lifelong role model and for his steadfast
encouragement, support, and honest counsel.
David would like to thank Dan O’Dowd and Mike Kleidermacher for generously sharing and
imparting their knowledge and passion about security over decades.
xix

--- Page 11 ---
David would like to thank the employees, both past and present, of Green Hills Software, for
their support over the years. It has been a privilege and honor to work with such a talentedgroup to make the world a better, safer, more secure place.xx Acknowledgements

--- Page 12 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Embedded
Systems Security
Chapter Outline
1.1 What is Security? 1
1.2 What is an Embedded System? 2
1.3 Embedded Security Trends 4
1.3.1 Embedded Systems Complexity 4
1.3.1.1 Case Study: Embedded Linux 6
1.3.2 Network Connectivity 12
1.3.3 Reliance on Embedded Systems for Critical Infrastructure 141.3.4 Sophisticated Attackers 151.3.5 Processor Consolidation 16
1.4 Security Policies 18
1.4.1 Perfect Security 181.4.2 Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability 181.4.3 Isolation 191.4.4 Information Flow Control 20
1.4.5 Physical Security Policies 21
1.4.6 Application-Specific Policies 21
1.5 Security Threats 22
1.5.1 Case Study: VxWorks Debug Port Vulnerability 22
1.6 Wrap-up 23
1.7 Key Points 23
1.8 Bibliography and Notes 24
1.1 What is Security?
Any book about security must start with some deﬁnition for it. If ten security professionals are
asked to deﬁne the term, ten different results will be forthcoming. To attain validity for theinnumerable variety of embedded systems and their functions, our brush uses a broad stroke:
Key Point
Security is the ability of an entity to protect resources for which it bears protection responsibility.
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00001-1
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1

--- Page 13 ---
In an embedded system, this protection responsibility may apply to resources within or
resources of the overall system to which the embedded system is connected or in which it issubsumed. As we discuss later in this chapter, the protective properties of a component orsystem are embodied in its security policy .
1.2 What is an Embedded System?
Attempts to deﬁne “embedded system” are also often fraught with controversy. For thepurposes of this book, we deﬁne embedded system as follows:
Key Point
An embedded system is an electronic product that contains a microprocessor (one or more) and
software to perform some constituent function within a larger entity.
Any deﬁnition of embedded system must be augmented with examples. We do not claim an
aircraft is an embedded system, but its ﬂight control system; trafﬁc collision avoidance system(TCAS); communication, navigation, and surveillance system (CNS); electronic ﬂight bagsystem (EFB); and even in-ﬂight entertainment system are all examples of embedded systemswithin the aircraft (see Figure 1.1 ).
We do not claim the automobile is an embedded system. But its infotainment “head-unit,” anti-lock breaking system, powertrain engine control unit, digital instrument cluster, and a plethoraof other electronic subsystems ddozens in the typical modern car dare all examples of
embedded systems (see Figure 1.2 ).
Embedded systems are often characterized by what they are not: the antithesis of the embeddedsystem is the desktop personal computer whose main Intel Architecture (IA)-basedmicroprocessor powers the human interface and application environment that serves as theentity’s sole purpose. Similarly, a rack-mounted server’s main microprocessor performsa dedicated service, such as hosting a website.
A gray area causes the aforementioned controversy. Some argue whether a smartphone is an
embedded system or just a miniature desktop computer. Nevertheless, there is little debate thatindividual components within the phone, such as the radio with its own basebandmicroprocessor and software, are embedded systems. Similarly, some servers contain auxiliarydaughter cards that perform health monitoring and remote management to improve overallavailability. Each card contains a microprocessor and software and hence meets our deﬁnition ofembedded system.
The scope of this book liberally includes smartphones whose overall security is highly
dependent upon embedded hardware and software.2 Chapter 1

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 1.1:
Embedded systems within modern commercial aircraft.
Figure 1.2:
Some embedded systems within a typical automobile.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 3

--- Page 15 ---
Of course, this book is concerned about embedded systems that are involved in some security-
critical function, and some embedded systems lack security requirements altogether. Thisbook generally does not concern itself with a standalone, battery-powered thermostat run by an8-bit microcontroller and a few kilobytes of software programmed in assembly code. Thelargest security challenge in embedded systems lies in network-connected, sophisticatedelectronic products that are managed by an embedded operating system running signiﬁcantsoftware applications written in high-level programming languages such as C, C þþ, Ada,
and Java.
1.3 Embedded Security Trends
The MP944, what many consider to be the world’s ﬁrst microprocessor, ran the ﬂight controlsystem aboard the U.S. Navy’s F-14 Tomcat ﬁghter jet and began what has been more than 40years of advancement in embedded systems technology. Depending on the particular analystasked, embedded computers account for 94% to 98% of the world’s computers. Practically everymajor multinational corporation dﬁrms such as Lockheed Martin, Exxon, General Motors,
Hewlett Packard, and Johnson & Johnson dbuilds and depends on embedded systems within its
most important products. And, of course, the average consumer depends on the embeddedapplications within aircraft, automobiles, games, medical equipment, and so on, constantly.
At the same time, software and hardware complexity, network connectivity, and malicious attack
threat continue to grow in embedded systems, which are increasingly relied upon for consumersafety and security. The smart grid dwith its smart appliances and sensors, smart meters, and
network gateways (all embedded systems) dis a good example, but only one of many. The
complex set of embedded systems and networks in a smart grid is shown in Figure 1.3 .
1.3.1 Embedded Systems Complexity
One of the ﬁrst embedded systems within an automobile was the 1978 Cadillac Seville’s tripcomputer, run by a Motorola 6802 microprocessor with 128 bytes of RAM and two kilobytes ofROM. The printed source code could not have occupied more than a handful of pages.
In contrast, even the lowest-end automobile today contains at least a dozen microprocessors;
the highest-end cars are estimated to contain approximately 100 microprocessors. Withinfotainment systems running sophisticated operating systems such as Microsoft Windows andLinux, the total embedded software content can easily exceed 100 million lines of code. TheF-35 Joint Strike Fighter’s avionics is estimated to host approximately 6 million lines ofcode, driven by ﬂy-by-wire controls, complex situational-awareness capabilities, sensorprocessing, and high-resolution graphical displays for the pilot. Enterprise network switchesand routers routinely contain millions of lines of code for network protocol processing,management and conﬁguration, anti-virus rate limiting, and access controls.4 Chapter 1

--- Page 16 ---
In short, complexity is driven by the inexorable demand for better capabilities, the digitization
of manual and mechanical functions, and the interconnection of our world. While this growthin electronic content has been beneﬁcial to society, that growth is also a key source of oursecurity woes.
Key Point
Many of the problems relating to loss in quality, safety, and/or security in electronic products can
be attributed to the growth of complexity that cannot be effectively managed.
It is well known that operational ﬂaws, such as a buffer overﬂows (when software fails to
validate the length of an input, permitting the input to overwrite beyond the end of an allocatedmemory area that is used to hold the input), are often the means by which attackers are able tocircumvent system security policies. Complexity, of course, cannot be measured only by codesize or transistor count.
Key Point
Linear growth in hardware/software content creates far more than linear growth in overall
complexity due to an exponential increase in interactions between functions and components.
Complexity breeds ﬂaws, and ﬂaws can be exploited to breach system security. Controlling
complexity from a security perspective is one of the foremost concerns of this book.
Figure 1.3:
Smart grid, embedded systems content, and sample network topology.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 5

--- Page 17 ---
1.3.1.1 Case Study: Embedded Linux
To help better understand the scope of this complexity problem and motivate the information
in Chapters 2 and 3 regarding software security, let’s take a closer look at the use of Linuxwithin embedded systems. Embedded Linux has been growing in popularity due to its royalty-free licensing, open source accessibility, and wide availability of device drivers andapplications. Despite having thousands of contributors worldwide, the strictly controlledchange management process for Linux (especially the Linux kernel) is excellent relative togeneral commercial software quality standards. Steve McConnell, in his book Code Complete,
estimates a software industry average of approximately 30 bugs per 1,000 lines ofproduction code.
1Yet the Linux kernel boasts a far better track record of between 1 and 5 bugs
per 10,000 lines of code.
The use of Linux in systems requiring high levels of security has been a frequent topic of
controversy. Supporters have claimed that Linux’s open source approach improves security dueto exposure to a worldwide community of developers and users (sometimes called the “manyeyes” theory). Detractors have maintained that the complexity and architecture of Linux makeit unsuitable for high criticality applications.
Two recent events are shining a bright light on this debate. In August 2009, the Linux
Foundation published a paper, Linux Kernel Development , detailing the massive, rapidly
growing development and deployment of Linux in everything from mobile phones to televisionsets and video cameras.
2About a year later, researchers published details of a severe kernel
vulnerability, which had existed in Linux for the preceding eight years.
With a Linux lifetime of over 15 years, there are now plenty of public statistics with which to
analyze the operating system’s robustness. This case study looks at the aforementioned recentevents as well as other public sources of information to conclude on the current state andoutlook for Linux in high-security systems.
1.3.1.1.1 Linux in Government Systems
Some powerful organizations have been supporters of Linux in security-critical governmentcomputer systems. Linux is the trusted operating system in HP’s NetTop, the Raytheon/TCSTrusted Thin Client, and the General Dynamics Trusted Virtual Environment (TVE)da product of NSA’s High-Assurance Platform (HAP) program. All these products are designedto consolidate computers used by government personnel to access classiﬁed and unclassiﬁednetworks. The specialized computer provides multiple “virtual” desktops and is trusted toprotect sensitive information. To prepare it better for the task of becoming the “touching point”between physically distinct networks, Linux was enhanced by the NSA’s National InformationAssurance Research Laboratory with additional security controls, known as Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux). The SELinux extensions have been adopted by the enterpriseLinux community and employed within the aforementioned computer systems.6 Chapter 1

--- Page 18 ---
Along with their investment in Linux, these military suppliers have made bold claims about the
trustworthiness of these products. According to General Dynamics, the TVE provides “highrobustness” and a “quantum leap in the way military and government security levels areaccessed.”
3
It is interesting to note, however, that the NSA’s developers were careful not to claim suitabilityfor high criticality systems, stating that SELinux is “very unlikely by itself to meet anyinteresting deﬁnition of secure system.” Furthermore, the SELinux effort has included “nowork focused upon increasing the assurance of Linux itself.”
4
While many discussions about the security of Linux have been clouded by hyperbole andcommercial agendas, a number of independent resources, many published by the Linuxcommunity, are painting a more complete, unbiased picture about Linux security.
Linux development follows general commercial practices, not compliant with any stringent
safety or security standard. While Linux’s open source exposure has enabled it to achieve a lowdefect rate relative to most commercial software, the size of the kernel assures a large andcontinuous dose of ﬂaws. In 2004, an automated static analysis tool discovered almost 1,000bugs in the Linux kernel.
The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology and the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security’s National Security Cyber Division publish a catalog, the NationalVulnerability Database (NVD), of security defects in commercial software products.
5As of
August 16, 2009, a search on Linux yielded 1,288 entries, 457 of which are considered “HighSeverity.” One hundred thirty-four high severity vulnerabilities are associated with the Linuxkernel. The NVD reports 91, 77, 87, 111, and 115 Linux kernel vulnerabilities for each of theyears 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, respectively. It is statistically assured that a similarnumber will be found in future years, implying that numerous vulnerabilities exist in today’sshipping version. These numbers, of course, do not account for unreported defects.
On August 10, 2009, a memory leak in the SELinux security extensions was published in
the NVD. A few days later, ﬁve more vulnerabilities were published. One of these, CVE-2009-2692, reports a severe kernel defect that can be trivially exploited by a user to takecomplete control of the system. This vulnerability was latent in the Linux kernel for eightyears!
1.3.1.1.2 Linux Rate of Change
Some critical software components gain assurance over time. This occurs when the software isrelatively simple, changes very little (except perhaps for bug ﬁxes), and is deployed for a longperiod of time in a variety of environments. The Linux kernel, however, undergoes continuousmodiﬁcation, including in the ﬁeld (e.g., over-the-air patching). The latest major version ofLinux, 2.6, has changed more rapidly than previous versions and regularly undergoes majorIntroduction to Embedded Systems Security 7

--- Page 19 ---
modiﬁcations to the “stable branch” of the kernel. As an example, Linux developer Greg
Kroah-Hartman reported that the 2.6.24 kernel saw approximately 5,000 lines of code addedper day during a three-month period, prompting his lament, “It’s fricken scarily amazing thatthings are still working at all. .”
6
The rate of change has been accelerating. Kroah-Hartman reported that over 12,000 lines ofcode were added per day on average during the 2.6.30 development cycle. Since 2005, theLinux kernel has been modiﬁed by more than 5,000 different people at a rate that nowexceeds six changes per hour. In the ﬁrst release of Linux 2.6 (2.6.0), the Linux kernelconsisted of more than 5 million lines of code. In 2.6.30, that number had grown to more than11 million lines.
Another good example was provided by Jim Ready, founder of embedded Linux vendor
MontaVista, who discussed NVD defect CVE-2006-1528, which was patched in Linux version2.6.13. To get the bug ﬁx in a supported release, a user running 2.6.10 would have been forcedto take in 846,233 new lines of code, representing the changes between versions 2.6.10 and2.6.13.
7
1.3.1.1.3 CVE-2009-2692 dAn Illustration of a Total Loss of Security
The following is a detailed description of the aforementioned severe kernel vulnerability. Thesubtlety of the ﬂaw, coupled with the contrastingly simple form of programs used to exploit it,provides readers with a ﬂavor for the difﬁculty facing Linux security. Readers who want to skipthe details should proceed to the next section.
Security researchers Tavis Ormandy and Julien Tinnes discovered a set of NULL function
pointer dereferences in the Linux kernel. The function pointers come from Linuxnetworking code. Linux uses a structure, called proto_ops, to hold a set of prototypical
operations associated with network sockets. The implementations of each operation varyacross socket families (e.g., AppleTalk, Bluetooth, Infrared, Stream Control Transmission
Protocol for IPv6). The function pointers associated with these operations are not
consistently initialized or validated at their kernel call sites. When a socket service call isexecuted by an application, the Linux kernel determines the proper proto_ops structure to
use based on the socket type. The kernel executes the function pointer for the requestedoperation within this structure.
The following Linux kernel example shows a proto_ops pointer (the splice_read operation)
that is NULL checked at the call site:
static ssize_t sock_splice_read(struct ﬁle * ﬁle, loff_t
*ppos, struct pipe_inode_info *pipe, size_t len, unsigned int ﬂags)
{
struct socket *sock = ﬁle->private_data;
if (unlikely(!sock->ops->splice_read))8 Chapter 1

--- Page 20 ---
return -EINVAL;
return sock->ops->splice_read(sock, ppos, pipe, len, ﬂags);
}
And here is an example where the same check is missing:
static ssize_t sock_sendpage(struct ﬁle * ﬁle, struct page *page, int offset, size_t
size, loff_t *ppos, int more)
{
struct socket *sock;
int ﬂags;
sock = ﬁle->private_data;
ﬂags = !( ﬁle->f_ ﬂags & O_NONBLOCK) ? 0 :
MSG_DONTWAIT;
if (more)
ﬂags j= MSG_MORE;
return sock->ops->sendpage(sock, page, offset, size, ﬂags);
}
Another method used in Linux to avoid proto-ops NULL dereferences is to pre-initialize the
pointer to a stub function. If the sendpage pointer in the preceding example is initialized to
the Linux stub sock_no_sendpage , then the unprotected call in the preceding code will
execute the stub function and avoid the NULL deference. Many socket family proto-ops
are initialized in this manner, for example, the one used for Infrared datagrams:
static const struct proto_ops
SOCKOPS_WRAPPED(irda_dgram_ops) = {
.family = PF_IRDA,.owner = THIS_MODULE,.release = irda_release,.bind = irda_bind,
.connect = irda_connect,.socketpair = sock_no_socketpair,.accept = irda_accept,.getname = irda_getname,.poll = datagram_poll,
.ioctl = irda_ioctl,
#ifdef CONFIG_COMPAT
.compat_ioctl = irda_compat_ioctl,
#endif
.listen = irda_listen,
.shutdown = irda_shutdown,
.setsockopt = irda_setsockopt,Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 9

--- Page 21 ---
.getsockopt = irda_getsockopt,
.sendmsg = irda_sendmsg_dgram,.recvmsg = irda_recvmsg_dgram,.mmap = sock_no_mmap,
.sendpage = sock_no_sendpage,
};
However, other instances are not properly initialized; for example, the following Bluetooth
Network Encapsulation Protocol (BNEP) proto-ops :
static const struct proto_ops bnep_sock_ops = {
.family = PF_BLUETOOTH,
.owner = THIS_MODULE,
.release = bnep_sock_release,.ioctl = bnep_sock_ioctl,
#ifdef CONFIG_COMPAT
.compat_ioctl = bnep_sock_compat_ioctl,
#endif
.bind = sock_no_bind,
.getname = sock_no_getname,.sendmsg = sock_no_sendmsg,.recvmsg = sock_no_recvmsg,.poll = sock_no_poll,
.listen = sock_no_listen,.shutdown = sock_no_shutdown,.setsockopt = sock_no_setsockopt,.getsockopt = sock_no_getsockopt,.connect = sock_no_connect,.socketpair = sock_no_socketpair,.accept = sock_no_accept,.mmap = sock_no_mmap
/MISSING SENDPAGE STUB INITIALIZATION
};
Thus, an attacker simply needs to invoke a sendpage operation on an open BNEP socket to
force a NULL dereference.
Kernel NULL execution can have a variety of effects. For example, execution of the 0 page
could cause the system to completely crash (a simple but total denial-of-service attack).However, several unrelated ﬂaws in the Linux kernel allow an attacker to inject arbitraryexecutable code into the kernel at address 0. In addition, as reported in NVD candidate CVE-2009-2695 and detailed by Red Hat, the SELinux extensions exacerbate the address0 execution vulnerability.10 Chapter 1

--- Page 22 ---
The combination of NULL pointer and kernel code injection vulnerabilities enable an
attacker to trivially take complete control of the system by forcing the kernel to execute theattacker’s code.
Several exploits of the proto-ops ﬂaw were immediately published. These exploits are simple
programs that a Linux user could run to demonstrate total security failure. The general ﬂow of
the exploit is as follows:
/* Code the attacker wants to execute at kernel */
/* Privilege to do absolutely anything! */
Attacker_code(void)
{
kprint( “*** You ’ve Been Hacked!!\n” );
.
}
.
/* Service call that causes address 0 to be mapped */unsigned char *Kernel0 = mmap(0, 0x1000, ﬂags, 0, 0);
/* Install instructions at 0 to run Attacker ’s code */
Kernel0[0] = ‘\xff ’; /* JMP DWORD eJump indirect */
Kernel0[1] = ‘\x25 ’;
*(unsigned long *)(Kernel0+2) = 6;/* Jump target is @6 */
*(unsigned long *)(Kernel0+6) = (unsigned long)&Attacker_code;
/* Create socket of type containing ﬂawed proto_ops */
fd = socket(PF_BLUETOOTH, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);
/* Use socket operation to cause NULL dereference */
/* This triggers the attacker ’s code to run */
send ﬁle(fd, .);
Linux has a “feature” that makes this exploit a bit easier: for improved system call
performance, Linux keeps the user application’s memory mappings enabled during systemcall servicing. This precludes the need to perform manual address translation on servicecall parameters located in application memory. Thus, the application’s memory page at address0 becomes the kernel’s page at address 0, and Attacker_code is automatically mapped and
executable by the kernel.
1.3.1.1.4 Case Study Wrap-Up
While Linux fulﬁlls the vision of its creators as a high-performance general-purpose operatingsystem, it was never designed for the level of robustness demanded for high criticality systems.This is no different from other general-purpose operating systems. Imagine using Windows torun the ﬂight control system in a modern airliner dan act that could give new meaning to the
term blue screen of death.
Solaris is another general-purpose operating system that has been deployed for networkconsolidation (it is used in the military’s DoDIIS Trusted Workstation). CVE-2007-0882 (highIntroduction to Embedded Systems Security 11

--- Page 23 ---
severity) describes an embarrassing defect in Solaris 10 and 11, which enables any attacker to
log in remotely, completely bypassing authentication.
So, to be clear, while the statistics in this case study reference Linux, the conclusions are
common to large-scale, monolithic, general-purpose software products. In addition, thesecurity problems in general-purpose operating systems are due not only to softwarecomplexity; kernel architecture is another important factor, as we discuss in Chapter 2.
Key Point
Embedded Linux is a good example of generally well-crafted software that, due to its immense
code complexity and rapid rate of change, is riddled with vulnerabilities and hence is not suitablefor the protection of high-value resources against sophisticated attack threats.
1.3.2 Network Connectivity
Another clear trend in embedded systems is the addition of network connectivity. Embedded
systems have traditionally been thought of as standalone entities immune to the risks of theInternet. There are many reasons why embedded systems are being networked. Connectivityenables remote management of an embedded system. Management tasks might includeupgrading software to address a ﬂaw. Network connectivity adds new capability. For example,home ovens built by TMIO allow owners to connect from a cell phone or the Internet toremotely turn on and off heating. Suddenly, home appliances are security critical.
In 2010, General Motors introduced a feature to enable car owners to manipulate the locks and
start the engine from anywhere on the planet using a smartphone. This remote connectionpiggybacks on GM’s OnStar telematics system, which became standard in all GM models in2007. Should consumers be worried about the security impact of this connectivity?
Just prior to GM’s announcement of the smartphone feature, a team of university researchers
published a study demonstrating how such a car’s critical systems dbrakes, engine throttling,
and so on dcould be maliciously tampered with by exploiting vulnerabilities in the car’s
embedded systems.
8
The researchers commandeered the car’s brakes, engine, and door locks via a diagnostics port.They learned how to bridge from the low-security network to the critical systems using fuzzingtechniques. The researchers showed admirable determination; practically every major criticalsubsystem of the car was discovered, learned, and then totally subverted. Brakes and enginewere disabled while the car was in motion, demonstrating that the attacks could indeed placepassengers in extreme peril. The research paper is fantastic, a must-read for embedded securityprofessionals and enthusiasts.12 Chapter 1

--- Page 24 ---
Many articles and blogs have been penned in response to the research, but the overall reaction
has been muted, almost soporiﬁc. This may be caused by the authors’ diligent attempt topreempt panic:
• “We’re not interested in taking an alarmist tone.”•“We
have no reason to believe this is an issue today.”
• “Today everyone is focusing on Web security and botnets. We want to make sure that in 5
or 10 years we don’t add cars to that list.”
The absence of alarm is surprising and concerning in and of itself. Are the researchersadvo cating security 
by obscurity? They refuse to reveal the hacked car’s make and model and
are not releasing their “car shark” tool used to implement the subversions. OnStar has alwaysprovided a remote connection. Attaching to the cellular networks simply opens up moreavenues of attack. Some may ask why anyone would want to attack the car network. That’s likeasking why would anyone want to attack the power grid? What better way to guaranteecatastrophe than disabling the brakes on millions of cars simultaneously? The bad guys havereally smart and dedicated researchers, too.
We need to take an alarmist tone. The research demonstrates that we have millions of
vulnerable cars on the road. We now know attackers are sophisticated enough to disablea driver’s brakes while he is barreling down the highway. The only question is whetherattackers are sophisticated enough to ﬁnd a way in remotely.
The researchers state: “In our car we identiﬁed no fewer than ﬁve kinds of digital radio
interfaces accepting outside input, some over only a short range and others over indeﬁnitedistance.. Taken together, ubiquitous computer control, distributed internal connectivity, and
telematics interfaces increasingly combine to provide an application software platform withexternal network access.”
Ironically, emergency connectivity services, like GM’s OnStar, may now provide the means for
distributed, remote attacks. Passengers want the Internet inside and smartphone apps to controlconvenience functions, but they never expected these interfaces to be connected to thedrivetrain. The researchers continue: “The CLS [Central Locking System] must also beinterconnected with safety critical systems such as crash detection to ensure that car locks aredisengaged after airbags are deployed to facilitate exit or rescue.”
What the researchers do not talk about is what we can do about embedded automotive security
today. Most likely small changes could be made to better isolate the network subsystems.Strong cryptographic authentication must be used for all network connections. Trustedplatforms and remote attestation must be used to prevent rogue ﬁrmware installs fromexposing the car network to attackers. Electronic Control Units (ECUs) with mixed criticalityfunctionality must employ high-assurance partitioning and access control: the rear-viewcamera must not be affected by iTunes.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 13

--- Page 25 ---
Car manufacturers and tier-1 OEMs may not have been thinking a lot about security when they
designed the cars hitting roads today, but clearly that must change. Manufacturers must workclosely with embedded security specialists early in the design and architecture of in-carelectronics and networks. Many of these topics are explored in detail throughout the book.
1.3.3 Reliance on Embedded Systems for Critical Infrastructure
Earlier, we mentioned the smart grid as an important, emerging source of embedded systemswith security requirements. One of the predominant concerns in this case is ﬁnancial: attackerscould manipulate metering information and subvert control commands to redirect consumerpower rebates to false accounts.
Smart grids imply the addition of remote connectivity, from millions of homes, to the back-end
systems that control power generation and distribution. These back-end systems are protectedby the same security technologies (ﬁrewalls, network access authentication, intrusiondetection, and protection systems) that today defend banks and governments against Internet-borne attacks. Successful intrusions into these systems are a daily occurrence. The ability toimpact power distribution has obvious safety ramiﬁcations, and the potential to impact a largepopulation increases the attractiveness of the target. The smart grid, if not architected properlyfor security, may provide hostile nation states and cyber terrorists with an attack path from thecomfort of their living rooms. Every embedded system on this pathd from the smart appliance
to the smart meter to the network concentrators dmust be secure.
Key Point
Utilities and their suppliers are still early in the development of security strategy and network
architectures for smart grids; a golden opportunity now exists to build in security from the start.
Transportation systems dplanes, trains, elevators, and industrial vehicles dprovide perhaps the
most obvious example of safety-critical embedded technology. In 2008, the U.S. Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) expressed concern about accessibility of the ﬂight controlsystem in Boeing’s newest commercial airliner, the 787 Dreamliner, from the passenger in-ﬂight entertainment system by way of the aircraft’s internal network. The FAA’s notiﬁcation toBoeing to address the potential for malicious access to the critical embedded avionics frompassengers is likely the ﬁrst of its kind in commercial aircraft history.
Financial infrastructure, including banks and credit card processors, has been a target for
hackers since the Internet became popular, and embedded systems are taking a larger role inhigh-value ﬁnancial transactions. For example, sophisticated point-of-sale kiosks in retailestablishments provide an attractive target: the ability to subvert the embedded system mayprovide access to locally stored credit card numbers as well as a pathway to the back-end14 Chapter 1

--- Page 26 ---
payment networks where hundreds of thousands to millions of sensitive ﬁnancial records are
stored.
Some medical devices have security requirements. Life-critical embedded systems with
signiﬁcant software content include patient monitoring systems, imaging equipment, andimplantable wireless devices. Digital radiography systems contain million-line source codebases and network connectivity for remote management and data archival. Security researchershave recently demonstrated the ability to commandeer pacemakers over a wireless network.
9
Electronic medical records (EMRs) introduce a threat to sensitive medical records; physiciansuse mobile devices to access patient information over the Internet.
Industrial process control is another important example of security-critical embedded systems.
We discuss this further in the following section.
1.3.4 Sophisticated Attackers
The increasing reliance on embedded systems in commerce, critical infrastructure, and life-critical functions makes them attractive to the well-funded and determined attacker. Embeddedindustrial control systems managing nuclear reactors, oil reﬁneries, and other criticalinfrastructure present opportunity for widespread damage.
Stuxnet inﬁltrated Siemens process control systems at nuclear plants by ﬁrst subverting the
Microsoft Windows workstations operators use to conﬁgure and monitor the embedded controlelectronics (see Figure 1.4 ).
Key Point
The Stuxnet worm is likely the ﬁrst malware to directly target embedded process control systems
and demonstrates the incredible sophistication potential in modern embedded security attacks.
Much of the security community discussion about Stuxnet has been speculation about the
attacker’s identity and motive as well as the unprecedented level of attack sophistication, whichincludes clever rootkit construction and the employment of no fewer than four zero-dayWindows vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities enabled Stuxnet to gain access to and downloadmalware to the Siemens controller itself, implying that the attackers had intimate knowledge ofits embedded software and hardware.
Stuxnet demonstrates the need for improved security skills within the embedded development
community, but it also elucidates the requirement for a higher level of assurance in criticalinfrastructure than with standard commercial IT practices. In Chapter 3, we discuss the levelsof security assurance appropriate to the level of threat and how the international CommonCriteria standard approaches this mapping.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 15

--- Page 27 ---
Stuxnet also demonstrates that embedded systems and IT systems are often interdependent.
SCADA networks are controlled by common PCs. As a response to Stuxnet, the U.S.Department of Defense Chief of Cyber Command and NSA Director, General Keith B.Alexander, recommended in September 2010 the creation of an isolated network for criticalinfrastructure. This may sound like a heavy-handed approach, but it is precisely how manygovernments protect their most sensitive, compartmentalized classiﬁed networks. Physicalisolation introduces some inefﬁciency that can be ameliorated with the application of high-assurance access solutions that enables a client computer to securely access multiple isolatedvirtual desktops and back-end networks. These access control systems use the latest andgreatest Windows or Linux human-machine interfaces but do not depend on Windows or Linuxfor their security. Rather, they rely on a technique called MILS Virtualization. MILSVirtualization is discussed in a case study involving software-deﬁned radio (SDR) in Chapter 6.
1.3.5 Processor Consolidation
Another security-impacting trend is processor consolidation within embedded systems. Theautomobile provides yet another good example. As the automobile continues its inexorabletransformation into an electronic system of systems, electronic component counts and
Figure 1.4:
Stuxnet inﬁltration of critical process control system via operator PC.16 Chapter 1

--- Page 28 ---
associated wiring content within the car have skyrocketed. This electronics growth poses
a signiﬁcant production cost, physical footprint, and time-to-market challenge for automotivemanufacturers. The response is to reverse the growth trend and instead merge disparatefunctions into a lesser number of electronic components. Consolidation requires the propersystems architecture to ensure that these components do not interact in unforeseen ways,posing a reliability risk to critical systems. Chapter 2 discusses the core of this architecture:a partitioning operating environment capable of providing strict resource guarantees,deterministic execution, strict access controls, application hardening, and high assurance.Examples of emerging consolidated applications are found later in this chapter and especiallyin Chapter 6.
Processor consolidation is closely aligned with the trend toward mixed criticality systems in
which safety, security, or real-time critical components must coexist with less-critical
components.
Key Point
Based on an informal survey of embedded systems developers attending recent Embedded
Systems Conferences, we predict that mixed criticality systems will account for at least 60% of allembedded projects by 2020.
For example, consolidating the infotainment head-unit with the rear-view camera component
results in a mixed criticality embedded system (see Figure 1.5 ).
Because it can share the center stack computer’s audio and video capability, the rear-viewcamera module is a natural candidate for consolidation. While the rear camera is still optionalon many car models, it is still considered a safety-critical function due to its ability to alert thedriver to hazards (think tricycle and small child) that may otherwise go unnoticed with humaneyesight alone.
Figure 1.5:
Mixed criticality automotive embedded system.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 17

--- Page 29 ---
1.4 Security Policies
Up until now, we’ve talked about security in a somewhat general sense, without formalizing the
speciﬁc security properties that we need our embedded systems to enforce. The properties andrequirements of a security-enforcing component or system are encompassed in what is calledthe component’s security policy . Security policies can have widely varying granularity,
depending on the level of detail required. For example, the purchaser of a ﬁrewall product maybe interested in a high-level security policy that states, “Ingress packets exhibiting a formatfound on a conﬁgurable blacklist of disallowed trafﬁc shall not be forwarded through theﬁrewall egress port.” The ﬁrewall’s administrator is interested in the implementation-speciﬁcsecurity policy conﬁgured in the blacklist. This policy might consist of hundreds of individualrules that block speciﬁc ports, protocols, origination and destination addresses, andpermutations of such parameters.
Security policies are necessary to make any practical evaluation of product security. In
a security evaluation, evaluators judge the assurance that product users can have with respect toclaimed security policies. Security policy is created to counter threats.
1.4.1 Perfect Security
Readers have probably heard this statement before: “There’s no such thing as perfect security,”or its corollary, “The only thing that is perfectly secure is a brick.” This sentiment originatesfrom users of technology, developers of technology, and even security pundits worldwide.
Unfortunately, this attitude is harmful. By starting with a broad negative assertion, developers
are provided a built-in excuse not to strive for the best achievable security. Furthermore, theassertion is simply false. In fact, it is possible to achieve perfect security. But it is important torealize that perfection can apply only to speciﬁc security policies, as we have just explained.While it is not feasible to prove the security policies of a billion-transistor multicoremicroprocessor, a small number of important pieces of software, such as an embeddedmicrokernel operating system, have had their security policies mathematically proven. Andthese formal proofs are augmented by exhaustive functional, coverage, and hardware platformtesting and a large suite of other assurance artifacts that have been evaluated and afﬁrmed byforemost experts in security certiﬁcation (such as the U.S. National Security Agency). InChapter 3, readers can ﬁnd a detailed case study of high-assurance operating system securitypolicies.
1.4.2 Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and Availability
Most security policies can be mapped to one or more conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability(CIA) protection elements. Conﬁdentiality is the prevention of unauthorized disclosure of18 Chapter 1

--- Page 30 ---
information. Integrity is the prevention of modiﬁcation or corruption of a resource. Availability
is the prevention of attacks that would keep a resource from being accessed or used accordingto its intended function.
Imagine a security policy that requires strong public key authentication to guard remote
network access to an automobile infotainment system. This policy could be in place to preventexposure of digital rights managed assets (conﬁdentiality) as well as to prevent remoteattackers from bridging across the infotainment network to disable the car’s critical systems(availability).
Key Point
When determining the appropriate security policy to implement within an embedded system,
developers must start by thinking of the highest-level conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability
(CIA) protections that must be upheld.
In Chapter 2, we discuss systems software security in detail, but to help better describe the
concept and application of security policy, here we summarize some of the relevant securitypolicies for the hardware and software components, such as operating system and memorymanagement unit, in managing the physical resources of an embedded platform (memory, CPUtime, I/O access).
1.4.3 Isolation
On embedded microprocessors that provide memory protection hardware (e.g., a memorymanagement unit), an operating system or hypervisor uses these hardware facilities and its ownsoftware techniques to enforce an isolation policy between software components.
Key Point
Component isolation is a foundational embedded systems security policy required to be able to
realize higher-level system security policies.
For example, the operating system kernel must be isolated from its hosted applications so that
the operating system can enforce access control policies for I/O resources under its control.Without this isolation, a faulty or malicious application could corrupt the kernel and prevent itfrom providing any other security services. Isolation, in this context, refers to temporal as wellas spatial isolation; a runaway application must not deny the execution of other applications orthe kernel itself.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 19

--- Page 31 ---
Another good example of the compositional power of isolation policy can be seen in the
effective deployment of cryptography services within a system. Applications such as IPsec oran encrypting ﬁle system, which employ cryptography to realize their security policies, dependon the isolation of the cryptographic subsystem (especially private keys) from otherapplications or subsystems. Without this isolation, private keys can be exposed, renderingimpotent the conﬁdentiality policy intended by data-in-motion (DIM) or data-at-rest (DAR)protection. Data-in-motion, also sometimes referred to as data-in-transit (DIT), security isenabled by network security protocols, and data-at-rest by storage media encryption. Both arediscussed in Chapter 5.
Isolation can also limit damage resulting from a security failure. For example, if a ﬁle system is
corrupted and fails to provide its ﬁle services, an isolated network stack can continue to provideits communications services. Damage limitation can be considered a security policy in and ofitself. Chapter 2 discusses the relative security advantages in operating system architecturesthat promote (or discourage) component isolation between typical operating system servicessuch as ﬁle systems and networking.
1.4.4 Information Flow Control
Operating system services, such as requests to spawn threads or manipulate I/O devices, areexamples of a strictly controlled information ﬂow between applications and the operatingsystem kernel. To assure the integrity of its own services and higher-level security policies, thekernel must conﬁgure applications and validate service call parameters according to thesystem’s information ﬂow control policy. For example, the information ﬂow policy may permitcomponents Alice and Bob to communicate, but not Alice and Charlie. An operatingsystem could enforce this policy by permitting runtime requests by Alice to send messagesto Bob but denying requests by Alice or Bob to send messages to Charlie (and vice versa), asinFigure 1.6 . Alternatively, the system designer may statically conﬁgure Alice and Charlie
such that they lack any communications descriptor upon which to make any such requests tothe operating system. Embedded operating system access control and other key securitypolicies and mechanisms are discussed further in Chapter 2.
Figure 1.6:
Sample information ﬂow security policy.20 Chapter 1

--- Page 32 ---
1.4.5 Physical Security Policies
In contrast to digital software-based attacks, some embedded systems must be protected
against physical attacks. For example, a smart grid aggregator, attached to a neighborhoodpower pole, guards access (via an authenticated, encrypted network connection) to the smartgrid from a large number of neighborhood smart meters. An attacker wishing to gainunauthorized entry into the back-end infrastructure can use physical attacks to tamper with theutility’s aggregator, attempting to steal private keys that will yield the desired network access.Radios used in a battleﬁeld environment for classiﬁed communications must be protectedagainst physical attack that would be possible if the enemy captured the radio.
Physical attacks come in two forms: invasive and non-invasive. Invasive attack on the smart
grid aggregator might include breaking open the aggregator’s enclosure to procure its ﬂashmemory and steal its stored private keys and software.
A non-invasive attack might include placing an energy monitor near the aggregator to perform
differential power analysis (DPA) of the system; power consumption patterns can be used toderive information about software functionality such as the execution of a well-knowncryptographic algorithm like the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). DPA and othertechniques have been applied successfully to recover secret keys. TEMPEST is a codename,coined in the 1960s, referring to non-invasive eavesdropping on electromagnetic emanations.
Another class of physical attack involves the use of malicious components within an embedded
system. The malicious component may be installed at any weak point in the supply chain ormanufacturing process of an embedded product or any of its subsystems. For example, in 2008,the U.S. government seized large quantities of Chinese-manufactured counterfeit Ciscorouters, leading to speculation that the routers were intended to weaken internal security andsteal sensitive information. Embedded designers must be concerned about the provenance ofall materials used to build a product, including microprocessors, cryptographic keys, andsoftware. Furthermore, supply chain security must encompass the transportation and deliveryof components and products between supplier and consumer.
1.4.6 Application-Speciﬁc Policies
A practically limitless set of security policies may be required to protect application-speciﬁcresources against the universe of potential threats. System designers must deﬁne application-speciﬁc policies that make sense for a particular embedded system implementation, component,and/or process. One example of application-speciﬁc policy is a role-based access control (RBAC)policy that deﬁnes (and therefore limits) the precise resource accesses permitted by softwareprocesses and/or human users based on their job responsibility and need to know. For example,a smart grid aggregator may require remote network access to upgrade software in the ﬁeld. Theaggregator contains a management process whose role permits an ability to reprogram theIntroduction to Embedded Systems Security 21

--- Page 33 ---
internal ﬂash memory for upgrade purposes. No other process within the system has a role that
permits this write access. The management role also requires access to the network from which toreceive management requests. The management application can then enforce its own application-speciﬁc policy that permits certain authenticated remote users to make upgrade requests.
1.5 Security Threats
As discussed earlier, security policies exist to counter security threats.
Key Point
System designers must ﬁrst determine what threats are feasible and then what security policies
make economic sense relative to the value of resources exposed to a particular threat.
An embedded system within Fort Knox and its army of security guards may not require
protection against physical attacks. An embedded system without a network connection doesnot require protection against network-borne attacks like packet storms, protocol replayattacks, and port probing.
An individual’s MP3 player is unlikely to be targeted by nation states or other sophisticated
attackers and hence does not justify expensive ﬁrewalls and NSA-certiﬁed operating systemsand cryptography. On the other hand, critical infrastructure systems must consider sophisticatedthreats such as side channel software attacks and memory/CPU denial-of-service attacks.
An embedded system may be insecure if the system designer errs in judging threats or how the
system may be vulnerable to those threats. Such lapses occur for many reasons, including sheerignorance about the capabilities of the underlying hardware, embedded operating system, orthird-party middleware. Does the system designer know what kind of cryptography (algorithm,key length, storage protection for private keys) the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocolimplementation uses? Does the designer know what ports the embedded operating systemmight be leaving open? Does the designer know how microprocessor and ﬁrmware boot arelocked down to guarantee the establishment of a secure initial state?
1.5.1 Case Study: VxWorks Debug Port Vulnerability
In 2010, a critical and widespread vulnerability was discovered in embedded systems runningVxWorks, an embedded real-time operating system (RTOS). Examples of affected productsinclude DSL concentrators, SCADA industrial automation systems, video conferencingsystems, Fiber Channel switches, and Wi-Fi routers. Researcher H.D. Moore used a debugcommunications port, lacking strong authentication, to commandeer the systems runningVxWorks. Using the debug interface, a remote attacker could read or write any physical22 Chapter 1

--- Page 34 ---
memory location: admin passwords could be extracted and supervisor mode malware trivially
installed. Moore revealed during a B-Sides security conference talk that a quarter milliondevices accessible directly from the Internet were found to be vulnerable. Most likely, the totalnumber of affected devices is orders of magnitude higher.
Embedded systems, historically thought of as autonomous, closed systems, are increasingly
constituents of the Internet of Things , with requirements for in-ﬁeld upgrade, remote
debugging and diagnostics, and other management functionality.
Embedded developers who fail to accurately assess threat, expose their systems, resources,
missions, and attached networks to risk of attack. Embedded security is not just about choosingthe right hardware and software technology. Equally important are security design andarchitecture, including conﬁguration, isolation of security functions, platform vulnerabilityassessment, establishment of a secure initial state, fail-security, and so on. While the answer tothis VxWorks hack may seem as simple as disabling the diagnostics connection or addingstrong authentication capability to it, a more systemic approach is often needed. What otheropen ports, buffer overﬂow ﬂaws, unprotected data, or other weaknesses may be present ina legacy software environment?
1.6 Wrap-up
Despite the growing roles of embedded systems, their security posture remains weak, and thevast majority of embedded systems professionals have only rudimentary knowledge ofembedded security issues. Many embedded systems professionals have worked with relativelysmall code bases and simple hardware architectures and are struggling to deal with the trendstoward more sophisticated designs, network connectivity, system consolidation, anddetermined and well-funded attackers. Furthermore, most embedded software professionalsare not trained in the art and science of designing systems for security. Security is anafterthought and almost never can be feasibly retroﬁtted.
The result is that embedded systems are shipped with vulnerabilities that leave critical
infrastructure exposed. Embedded systems professionals need to be educated on the state-of-
the-art in embedded systems security so that they can integrate and apply these practices toimprove security. It is the authors’ fervent hope that this book takes the embedded developmentcommunity a signiﬁcant step forward in this goal.
1.7 Key Points
1. Security is the ability of an entity to protect resources for which it bears protection
responsibility.
2. An embedded system is an electronic product that contains a microprocessor (one or
more) and software to perform some constituent function within a larger entity.Introduction to Embedded Systems Security 23

--- Page 35 ---
3. Many of the problems relating to loss in quality, safety, and/or security in electronic
products can be attributed to the growth of complexity that cannot be effectively managed.
4. Linear growth in hardware/software content creates far more than linear growth in overall
complexity due to an exponential increase in interactions between functions and
components.
5. Embedded Linux is a good example of generally well-crafted software that, due to its
immense code complexity and rapid rate of change, is riddled with vulnerabilities andhence is not suitable for the protection of high-value resources against sophisticatedattack threats.
6. Utilities and their suppliers are still early in the development of security strategy and
network architectures for smart grids; a golden opportunity now exists to build in securityfrom the start.
7. The Stuxnet worm is likely the ﬁrst malware to directly target embedded process control
systems and demonstrates the incredible sophistication potential in modern embeddedsecurity attacks.
8. Based on an informal survey of embedded systems developers attending recent
Embedded Systems Conferences, we predict that mixed criticality systems will accountfor at least 60% of all embedded projects by 2020.
9. When determining the appropriate security policy to implement within an embedded
system, developers must start by thinking of the highest-level conﬁdentiality, integrity,and availability (CIA) protections that must be upheld.
10. Component isolation is a foundational embedded systems security policy required to be
able to realize higher-level system security policies.
11. System designers must ﬁrst determine what threats are feasible and then what security
policies make economic sense relative to the value of resources exposed to a threat.
1.8 Bibliography and Notes
1. McConnell S. Code Complete . 2nd ed. Redmond, WA; Microsoft Press; 2004.
2. Kroah-Hartman G, Corbet J, McPherson A. Linux Kernel Development: How Fast It Is Going, Who Is Doing It,
What They Are Doing, and Who Is Sponsoring It: An August 2009 Update. Linux Foundation, 2009.
3. General Dynamics. website: http://www.gdc4s.com/content/detail.cfm?item ¼570bc11a-1d6d-4acf-a68e-
c256a615808d&page ¼2.
4. NSA SELinux Frequently Asked Questions: http://www.nsa.gov/research/selinux/faqs.shtml .
5.http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/search .
6.http://kerneltrap.org/mailarchive/linux-kernel/2008/2/2/700024 .
7. Corbet J. An Interview with Jim Ready (June 11, 2008), LWN.net.
8. Koscher K, Czeskis A, Roesner F, Patel S, Kohno T. Experimental Security Analysis of a Modern Automobile .
Oakland, CA: 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy; May 19, 2010.
9. Halperin D, Heydt-Benjamin TS, Ransford B, Clark SS. Pacemakers and Implantable Cardiac Deﬁbrillators:
Software Radio Attacks and Zero-Power Defenses . Oakland, CA: 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy; March 12, 2008.24 Chapter 1

--- Page 36 ---
CHAPTER 2
Systems Software Considerations
Chapter Outline
2.1 The Role of the Operating System 26
2.2 Multiple Independent Levels of Security 27
2.2.1 Information Flow 27
2.2.2 Data Isolation 272.2.3 Damage Limitation 282.2.4 Periods Processing 282.2.5 Always Invoked 292.2.6 Tamper Proof 29
2.2.7 Evaluable 29
2.3 Microkernel versus Monolith 31
2.3.1 Case Study: The Duqu Virus 34
2.4 Core Embedded Operating System Security Requirements 34
2.4.1 Memory Protection 34
2.4.2 Virtual Memory 35
2.4.2.1 Guard Pages 352.4.2.2 Location Obfuscation 36
2.4.3 Fault Recovery 37
2.4.4 Guaranteed Resources 38
2.4.5 Virtual Device Drivers 412.4.6 Impact of Determinism 422.4.7 Secure Scheduling 45
2.5 Access Control and Capabilities 46
2.5.1 Case Study: Secure Web Browser 472.5.2 Granularity versus Simplicity of Access Controls 492.5.3 Whitelists versus Blacklists 512.5.4 Confused Deputy Problem 532.5.5 Capabilities versus Access Control Lists 53
2.5.5.1 Case Study: MLS Resource Manager 55
2.5.6 Capability Confinement and Revocation 582.5.7 Secure Design Using Capabilities 60
2.6 Hypervisors and System Virtualization 61
2.6.1 Introduction to System Virtualization 642.6.2 Applications of System Virtualization 652.6.3 Environment Sandboxing 65
2.6.4 Virtual Security Appliances 65
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00002-3
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 25

--- Page 37 ---
2.6.5 Hypervisor Architectures 66
2.6.5.1 Monolithic Hypervisor 66
2.6.5.2 Console Guest Hypervisor 67
2.6.5.3 Microkernel-based Hypervisor 68
2.6.6 Paravirtualization 69
2.6.7 Leveraging Hardware Assists for Virtualization 70
2.6.7.1 ARM TrustZone 71
2.6.8 Hypervisor Security 73
2.6.8.1 SubVirt 732.6.8.2 Blue Pill 732.6.8.3 Ormandy 73
2.6.8.4 Xen Owning Trilogy 73
2.6.8.5 VMware’s Security Certiﬁcation and Subsequent Vulnerability Postings 74
2.7 I/O Virtualization 74
2.7.1 The Need for Shared I/O 752.7.2 Emulation 75
2.7.3 Pass-through 76
2.7.4 Shared IOMMU 782.7.5 IOMMUs and Virtual Device Drivers 782.7.6 Secure I/O Virtualization within Microkernels 79
2.8 Remote Management 80
2.8.1 Security Implications 81
2.9 Assuring Integrity of the TCB 83
2.9.1 Trusted Hardware and Supply Chain 832.9.2 Secure Boot 84
2.9.3 Static versus Dynamic Root of Trust 84
2.9.4 Remote Attestation 87
2.10 Key Points 88
2.11 Bibliography and Notes 90
2.1 The Role of the Operating System
Because the operating system controls the resources (e.g., memory, CPU) of the embedded
system, it has the power to prevent unauthorized use of these resources. Conversely, if theoperating system fails to prevent or limit the damage resulting from unauthorized access,disaster can result. In an operating system context, unauthorized actors may refer toapplications/processes, collections of applications, and/or human users that attempt to accesscomputer resources not permitted by the system security policy.
Key Point
The operating system bears a tremendous burden in achieving safety and security.26 Chapter 2

--- Page 38 ---
Operating system security is not a new ﬁeld of research. Yet practically all the deployed
embedded operating systems are unable to meet meaningfully high levels of securitycertiﬁcation. One of the reasons for the lack of secure operating systems is the historicalapproach taken to achieve security. In most cases, security is bolted on as an afterthought.However, even operating systems designed for security attempted to provide a kitchen sink ofservicesdprotection and partitioning, device access controls, secure ﬁle systems, and secure
network services. As a result, these systems were simply too large and complicated to evaluateat high levels of security.
We would all agree that it is a bad idea to trust our critical embedded systems to insecure
operating systems. Unfortunately, much of the world’s computer systems used to monitor andcontrol plants and equipment in industries such as water and waste control, energy, and oilreﬁning are running such operating systems, the same as those running a run-of-the-milldesktop PC. As stated by Mich ael Vatis, executive director of the Markle Foundation’s
Task Force on National Security in the Information Age, “The vulnerabilities are endemicbecause we have whole networks and infrastructures built on software that’s insecure. Oncean outsider gains root access, he could do anything. Any given day, some new vulnerabilitypops up.”
23
2.2 Multiple Independent Levels of Security
Recently, a small number of embedded operating system technologies have taken a newapproach that attempts to divide and conquer the problem of operating system security. Theseoperating systems adopt the Multiple Independent Levels of Security (MILS) architecture thatstipulates a layered approach to security.
Key Point
The foundation of a MILS-based embedded system is the separation kernel, a small microkernel
that implements a limited set of critical functional security policies, including data isolation,information ﬂow control, damage limitation, and periods processing.
2.2.1 Information Flow
Information cannot ﬂow between partitioned applications unless explicitly permitted by the
system security policy.
2.2.2 Data Isolation
Data within partitioned applications cannot be read or modiﬁed by other applications.Systems Software Considerations 27

--- Page 39 ---
2.2.3 Damage Limitation
If a bug or attack damages a partitioned application, this damage cannot spread to other
applications.
2.2.4 Periods Processing
Periods processing is a policy that ensures that information within one component is not leakedinto another component through resources, such as kernel-managed memory buffers and CPUregisters, which may be reused across execution periods. For example, if component A storesprivate information in a memory page and then releases that memory page back to theoperating system kernel, the kernel must ensure that the page is cleared before it can be reusedby another component B requesting a memory page allocation (see Figure 2.1 ). Similarly, if
microprocessor registers are written with data during A’s execution, the operating system mustensure that these register values are cleared when context switching to B on the same core.Without periods processing, the conﬁdentiality of A’s information would be violated bydisclosure of information to B through these computer resources.
The MILS separation kernel realizes these MILS policies by using the microprocessor’s
memory management hardware to prevent unauthorized access between partitions and byimplementing resource allocation mechanisms that prevent one partition’s operation fromaffecting another (e.g., by exhausting a resource such as memory or CPU time). Theinformation ﬂow policy prevents unauthorized access to devices and other system resources byemploying an efﬁcient capability-based object model that supports both conﬁnement andrevocation of these capabilities when the system security policy deems it necessary.Capabilities and the associated revocation and conﬁnement properties are discussed later inthis chapter.
Figure 2.1:
Periods processing example: sanitization of memory prevents information leakage across
security domains.28 Chapter 2

--- Page 40 ---
The MILS architecture also adopts the reference monitor or reference validation mechanism,
ﬁrst described in a 1970s U.S. government computer security report.1
Key Point
A separation kernel is considered a reference monitor when the kernel’s MILS policy enforcement
mechanisms are always invoked, tamper-proof, and evaluable.
These three properties are described further in the following sections.
2.2.5 Always Invoked
Applications requesting resources or services from the operating system must not be
able to bypass the system security policies. For example, let’s consider an operatingsystem that enforces the following access control policy for p rocesses A and B over ﬁles
X, Y, and Z: process A is permitted to access ﬁles X, Y, and Z, but process B is notpermitted to access any of X, Y, or Z. However, let’s suppose that process B is able toobtain access to /dev/hdd, the physical hard disk device used by the ﬁle system. B can usethis physical device to bypass the ﬁle system altogether (see Figure 2.2 ) and access any
ﬁle on disk.
2.2.6 Tamper Proof
Applications must not be able to tamper with the security policy or its enforcementmechanisms. Using the preceding ﬁle system example, the access control policy for a ﬁle isencoded in the ﬁle’s metadata or in a special policy ﬁle maintained by the ﬁle system. Onceagain, given direct access to the underlying hard drive, B can tamper with the access controlpolicy data and give itself or its confederates access to ﬁles X, Y, and Z.
2.2.7 Evaluable
Security claims are a dime a dozen. Anyone can make claims about security. The question is:how conﬁdent are end users and other stakeholders that a product actually fulﬁlls its claims?This conﬁdence is referred to as security assurance .
Key Point
The MILS architecture requires the use of security-enforcing components whose functional
requirements meet a high level of assurance.Systems Software Considerations 29

--- Page 41 ---
Highly reputable ﬁrms make unsubstantiated claims about security that fall ﬂat in the face of
discovered vulnerabilities. For example, let’s look at a recent security certiﬁcation for theVMware enterprise hypervisor.
As VMware virtualization deployments in the data center have grown, security experts have
voiced concerns about the implications of “VM sprawl” and the ability of virtualizationtechnologies to ensure security. On June 2, 2008, VMware attempted to allay this concern withits announcement that its hypervisor products had achieved a Common Criteria EvaluatedAssurance Level (EAL) 4 security certiﬁcation. VMware’s press release claimed that itsvirtualization products could now be used “for sensitive, government environments thatdemand the strictest security.”
On June 5, just three days later, severe vulnerabilities in the certiﬁed VMware hypervisors were
posted to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (U.S. CERT) National VulnerabilityDatabase. Among other pitfalls, the vulnerabilities “allow guest operating system users toexecute arbitrary code.” In Chapter 3, we discuss the Common Criteria security standard andthe relative assurance levels; but sufﬁce it to say that EAL 4 does not meet the high level ofassurance sought by MILS. Chapter 3 discusses Common Criteria in more detail, focusing onthe differences in evaluated assurance levels.
MILS stipulates that core kernel security policy enforcement be evaluable to the highest levels
of assurance. This assurance is absolutely critical and is the reason why the separation kernel
Figure 2.2:
Bypassing ﬁle system policy via direct media access.30 Chapter 2

--- Page 42 ---
enforces a focused set of policies and does not provide higher-level security policies such as
role-based access control for ﬁles or network security. Since a high-assurance securityevaluation requires a formal model of the system, formal proof of correspondence between themodel and actual implementation, and proof of security theorems against this model, a systemof more than approximately 10,000 lines of code becomes too difﬁcult and expensive toevaluate. The MILS security policies can be implemented with a microkernel that is smallenough to be evaluated at the highest assurance level.
Under the MILS concept, higher-level secure software, such as a secure communications
mechanism, web server, or ﬁle system, can be layered on top of the separation kernel. TheMILS security policies are recursive: a MILS ﬁle system, using the fact that an underlyingseparation kernel enforces its partitioning security policies, can be used to ensure ﬁle systemdata isolation, information ﬂow, and damage limitation properties. System designers can select,as needed, the MILS components that make up an actual system. If the system does not requirea secure web server, then there is no need to go through the pain of evaluating one. MILScomponents can be independently evaluated at the highest assurance level and can come frommultiple vendors. This modular approach to security is a key reason why MILS-based systemshave been widely deployed with a lower overall life-cycle cost than early attempts to createveriﬁed operating systems.
Another major advantage of the separation kernel is that it allows software at varying levels
of criticality to run on a single microprocessor. For example, an application containingclassiﬁed data and algorithms can occupy one partition while another partition is connectedto an unclassiﬁed network such as the Internet. The MILS security policies, if highlyassured, make this possible. This can lead to enormous cost savings in productdevelopment because complicated multi-function applications can run on a single powerfulmicroprocessor without requiring all these applications to be evaluated at the highestassurance level.
2.3 Microkernel versus Monolith
In computer security, the term Trusted Computing Base (TCB) is used to refer to those portions
of a system (software and hardware) that are critical to security and therefore must betrustworthy.
Monolithic operating systems contain system software, such as networking stacks, ﬁle systems,
and complex device drivers that share a single memory space and execute in privileged(supervisor) mode. This results in a large TCB, providing a plethora of opportunities forhackers to ﬁnd and exploit vulnerabilities. Examples of monolithic operating systems includeWindows, UNIX, Linux, and VxWorks.Systems Software Considerations 31

--- Page 43 ---
Key Point
Microkernel operating systems provide a better architecture for security than monolithic oper-
ating systems.
A microkernel operating system runs only a minimal set of critical system services, such as
thread management, exception handling, and inter-process communication, in supervisor modeand provides an architecture that enables complex systems software to run in user mode, wherethey are permitted access only to the resources deemed appropriate by the system designer.A failure in one component cannot cause damage to the hard drive because the infectedcomponent simply does not have access to that resource. Because the microkernel is simple, itssecurity can be more easily veriﬁed and assured. If a network driver does not perform a securityfunction, then it is not considered part of the TCB and need not be held to the same securitystandard as the microkernel or other critical components. In a monolithic system, the networkdriver is part of the kernel and therefore security critical by deﬁnition. Figure 2.3 depicts the
stark difference between the microkernel and monolithic approaches in which typicaloperating system services are either isolated from each other (and the kernel), or they are not.
Most general-purpose operating systems are monolithic because they focus foremost on
performance. User applications are able to access most services dTCP/IP networking, ﬁles,
and I/O devicesd with a simple and efﬁcient system call into the monolithic kernel. In contrast,
a microkernel implements these services in separate processes, requiring inter-process
Figure 2.3:
Microkernel (top) versus monolith (bottom).32 Chapter 2

--- Page 44 ---
communications (IPC) between the requesting process and one or more of the relevant system
service processes. For example, an application that wishes to access a remote, network-residentﬁle system using Network File System (NFS) may require communications between theapplication, a TCP/IP process, a network interface device driver process, and an NFS process.This work is behind the scenes: the user application employs the same read() orwrite()
applications programming interface (API) that a monolithic operating system provides, and themicrokernel takes care of routing data between the appropriate system processes.
The chief historical complaint against microkernels is the loss in performance due to the extra
context switches and message-passing overhead of this service process architecture. Twotrends have dissolved this complaint. First, faster microprocessors have reduced the impact ofIPC overhead. Second, commercial microkernel developers have become adept at optimizingIPC. For example, Jochen Liedtke, the original author of the open source L4 microkernel,published studies demonstrating that microkernel IPC could be improved dramatically bydesign over ﬁrst-generation efforts from the 1980s.
2The most compelling evidence,
however, that microkernels have become practical is the widespread successful embeddeddeployments using microkernels since 2000. Microkernels run practically every type ofembedded product, including smartphones, avionics, networking gear, processcontrol systems, and medical devices. Examples of microkernel-based embeddedoperating systems include INTEGRITY, LynxSecure, Neutrino/QNX, OKL4, PikeOS, andSymbian.
Over the years, operating system designers have expressed differences of opinion, sometimes
vociferously, regarding the relative merit of these two major approaches to operating systemdesign. O’Reilly published portions of a now-infamous debate between Linus Torvalds, thefounder of Linux, and Andrew Tanenbaum, a professor and researcher of operating systems,which started in 1992.
3Unfortunately, much of this debate has failed to focus on the core
architectural impact of operating system design on security. Rather, the debate has meanderedacross open source licensing issues, patching protocols, and, at times, personal insults. WhileLinux has had and will to continue to have tremendous adoption due to its open sourcelicensing and development model, it should be obvious to all readers that a component-basedmicrokernel is superior for security and robustness. Even Torvalds admitted such in one of hise-mails to Tanenbaum: “True, Linux is monolithic, and I agree that microkernels are nicer.From a theoretical (and aesthetical) standpoint Linux loses.” Practically every notableuniversity operating system researcher dAndrew Tanenbaum, Gernot Heiser, Jochen Liedtke,
Jonathan Shapiro, Kang Shin, Ken Thompson, Rajkumar Buyya, and many othersdhaveasserted the architectural superiority of the microkernel approach.
Furthermore, as we discuss later in this chapter, the decision to use a microkernel or monolithic
operating system is not necessarily mutually exclusive; virtualization provides the ability toincorporate the best implementations of both architectures in a single system.Systems Software Considerations 33

--- Page 45 ---
2.3.1 Case Study: The Duqu Virus
In November 2011, security researchers discovered a dangerous computer virus, dubbed Duqu .
Similar to the Stuxnet attack described in Chapter 1, Duqu is believed to have been written by
sophisticated attackers and takes advantage of a zero-day Windows vulnerability to gain accessto embedded critical control infrastructure. As described in the Microsoft security advisory:“An attacker who successfully exploited this vulnerability could run arbitrary code in kernelmode. The attacker could then install programs; view, change, or delete data; or create newaccounts with full user rights. We are aware of targeted attacks that try to use the reportedvulnerability.”
4The National Vulnerability Database has assigned the vulnerability a severity
rating of 9.3 (high),5primarily due to its remote exploitability and the impact implied by
malicious root access.
According to online reports, and corroborated by the aforementioned National Vulnerability
Database entry overview, common Windows operating systems (XP, Vista, Windows 7,Windows Server) all execute the font-parsing engine in the kernel. In fact, the font parsingoccurs in win32k.sys, the massive Windows system device driver module that has been the
cause of many “blue screens of death” (BSOD) over the years.
Duqu’s authors crafted Word documents that would exploit the font-parsing vulnerability,
enabling remote code execution at superuser privilege. As we have learned from many suchvulnerabilities (Stuxnet being just one other case in point), once the attacker has an effectivemalware vehicle like this, it is a simple matter to socially engineer attack targets intoopening the ﬁle. The attacker needs only one successful endpoint intrusion; the infected PCis then used as a launching point against electronics and computers accessible to the PClocally and across the network.
Duqu provides a wonderful example of the deleterious repercussions of monolithic operating
system design. In some cases, win32k.sys consists of millions of bytes of device driver code
executing in kernel/superuser mode.
2.4 Core Embedded Operating System Security Requirements
The use of microkernel architecture, of course, is only one important part of the security storyfor embedded operating systems. In the following sections, we discuss key technical features ofembedded operating systems that impact security.
2.4.1 Memory Protection
Key Point
Memory protection is a fundamental requirement for robust embedded systems.34 Chapter 2

--- Page 46 ---
The operating system utilizes memory protection hardware of the microprocessor to isolate
unrelated functions. The protected components are often called processes. A software
application may be mapped to one or more operating system processes. With memoryprotection, malicious code is unable to crash an application or the operating system bycorrupting its memory. Similarly, an errant pointer caused by a programming error in oneapplication cannot affect another application executing in a separate memory-protectedprocess.
2.4.2 Virtual Memory
Most modern operating systems support virtual memory in which the addresses of a process’s
code and data are logical rather than physical. The kernel uses memory management hardware
to map the logical memory to physical memory. For example, let’s consider three processes: A,B, and C, each of which requires four kilobytes of storage. In a virtual memory system, A, B,and C may all occupy the same logical address range, say 0x1000 to 0x2000, within separatevirtual address spaces. The operating system maps these four-kilobyte blocks to physicallocations, say 0x10000, 0x11000, and 0x12000 that are hidden from the processes themselves(see Figure 2.4 ).
Several embedded operating systems, such as OSE and VxWorks, employ memory protectionwithout virtual memory. In the example of A, B, and C, a ﬂat memory model operating systemmay locate these processes at physical addresses 0x10000, 0x11000, and 0x12000. Theseaddresses are visible to the program; code and data objects are linked and loaded within thesephysical ranges.
Key Point
Virtual memory provides additional security features, including guard pages and location
obfuscation, on top of basic memory protection.
2.4.2.1 Guard Pages
One big advantage of virtual memory is the ability to selectively map and unmap pages into
a virtual address space. Of course, physical memory pages are mapped in to hold theapplication’s code and data. In addition, pages are mapped in to hold the runtime stacks ofapplication processes. The operating system should provide the ability to leave a page’s (ormore) worth of the virtual addresses below each stack area unmapped so that if a processoverﬂows its stack, a hardware memory protection fault will be triggered. The kernel willsuspend the process instead of allowing it to corrupt other important memory areas within theaddress space. In a ﬂat memory model, each physical memory page represents actual RAM (orSystems Software Considerations 35

--- Page 47 ---
ROM), so unmapping a page effectively causes that chunk of RAM, which is typically limited
in an embedded system, to be lost. Memory protection, including this kind of stack overﬂowdetection, is also very useful during the development of an application. Programming errorsoften generate exceptions that are immediately detected and easily traceable to the source code.Without memory protection, bugs can cause subtle corruptions that are extremely difﬁcult totrack down. In fact, on some microprocessors, RAM is often located at physical address 0, soeven a NULL pointer dereference can go undetected!
2.4.2.2 Location ObfuscationAnother security beneﬁt of virtual memory is that it hides the physical locations of code and
data, making it harder for an attacker to discern internal operation or state. For example, let’ssuppose that an attacker is able to snoop the physical address bus. By watching addressrequests, the attacker can determine which process is executing and gain insight into the
Figure 2.4:
Three virtual-memory-protected processes.36 Chapter 2

--- Page 48 ---
behavior of that process. In a virtual memory system, the reference to a physical address cannot
be mapped back to a process without having ﬁrst compromised the operating system’s internaldata structures.
2.4.3 Fault Recovery
The fact is that there are bugs in software, and failures will occur. Most programmershave probably seen statistics detailing the average number of bugs per line of productionsource code. And as applications become more complex, performing more functions fora technology-hungry world, the number of actual bugs in ﬁelded systems will continue toincrease.
Key Point
System designers must plan for failures and employ fault recovery techniques.
Of course, fault recovery is application dependent: the response to a statistics gatheringprogram generating incorrect data is going to differ from the response to a failed networkconnection. But the operating system must provide some fundamental features that enable thesystem designer to build in fault tolerance and high availability.
When a process faults (e.g., due to an invalid memory access), the kernel must provide some
mechanism whereby notiﬁcation can be sent to an agent that is in charge of performing sometype of fault recovery action. This supervisor process should be able to run in its own addressspace since the data in the address space containing the faulted process may be corrupted. Thekernel must provide a mechanism enabling a supervisor process to close down the faultedprocess. The kernel must provide a mechanism for restarting an application. The kernel mustprovide an event logging mechanism so that the cause of a failure can be determined by laterexamining everything that happened in the system, such as kernel service calls, process contextswitches, and interrupts, prior to the fault. The kernel must provide a software watchdogcapability whereby a supervisor process can be notiﬁed when a periodic process does notexecute its expected code sequence; this is important because some failures may not directlycause a hardware exception.
The kernel must also protect itself against improper service calls. Many kernels pass the actual
pointer to a newly created kernel object, such as a semaphore, back to the application asa handle and then dereference this pointer when passed into subsequent kernel service callsmade by the application. The application can pass in an invalid pointer with disastrous results.No kernel service call must ever be permitted to take down the kernel. The operating systemshould employ opaque descriptors for application references to kernel objects. The kernel mustvalidate all service call parameters.Systems Software Considerations 37

--- Page 49 ---
2.4.4 Guaranteed Resources
Key Point
Despite memory protection and virtual memory, malicious code can still take down a critical
application by starving it of resources.
Most operating systems employ a central store for memory resources. As protected processes
ask for new resources (e.g., heap memory, threads), the operating system allocates theseresources from the central store. An errant or malicious application can request too manyresources, causing the central store to be depleted and critical applications to fail when theyattempt to obtain their required resources. A similar denial-of-service attack can occur withCPU time. A malicious process can spawn multiple “confederate” processes that soak up theCPU time, keeping critical applications from accomplishing their tasks.
It is possible to architect an operating system such that these critical resources are partitioned
according to individual application requirements. An infected process can exhaust its ownquota of resources, but it cannot possibly affect the quota of resources held by criticalapplications. The difference between the central store and quota approaches to memoryallocation is depicted in Figure 2.5 .
Figure 2.5:
Central store versus quotas for memory.38 Chapter 2

--- Page 50 ---
In the top portion of the diagram, two of the applications make memory allocation
requests until the entire central store is exhausted, starving the third application. In thelower portion of the diagram, each application has a quota that cannot be affected by theother applications.
It is important to understand that guaranteed resource partitioning is not practical to retroﬁt to
an operating system not designed for it. For example, it is relatively easy to retroﬁt a basicquota system for memory, ﬁles, and other resources. In fact, UNIX and Linux provide sucha system, called rlimit , which was ﬁrst added to Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) UNIX
in version 4.2, circa 1983. The problem with a bolt-on approach like rlimit is that it fails toaccount for resources allocated internally by the kernel on behalf of its processes. For example,the kernel must use physical memory for internal storage of object control blocks, schedulinglists, virtual memory page tables, device driver buffers, and other resources. These resourcesare strewn throughout the kernel, and UNIX rlimit fails to attribute their allocation to anyparticular process. Thus, each of these shared resources becomes a potential denial-of-servicevulnerability.
A simple denial-of-service exploit of an rlimit-equipped UNIX operating system is the fork
bomb : spawn a large number of processes to exhaust the kernel’s internal process table. Even if
the system enforces per-user process count limits, malware that inﬁltrates the accounts of
multiple users can still bring a system to its knees, preventing other applications from beinglaunched. Most users of UNIX or Linux systems have at one time or another experienced thefrustrating message “No more processes.”
Furthermore, the process table is only one of the shared resources affected by a fork bomb.
A fork operation is expensive in terms of CPU and memory bandwidth, and the mere act ofexecuting a large number of forks concurrently is enough to keep critical applications frommaking progress.
A secure partitioning operating system never dynamically allocates resources from a shared
pool. For example, let’s suppose a process loads a dynamic link library (DLL). The DLL ismapped into the process’s virtual address space, requiring new logical to physical pagemappings that must be managed by the kernel. This management may require storage forinternal accounting; that memory must be attributed to and subtracted from the quota of theprocess that originated the service request. Secure partitioning is the cornerstone ofa MILS-compliant separation kernel.
It is also important to note that using a secure partitioning microkernel does not necessarily
imply that any of the microkernel’s hosted processes providing their own services, such asnetwork communications or ﬁle management, will also provide resource guarantees to theirclients. Embedded systems designers will likely be faced with a choice of process servers,some of which provide secure partitioning and some that do not. For example, a microkernelSystems Software Considerations 39

--- Page 51 ---
may host a UNIX-compatible ﬁle system that does not enforce secure partitioning of its
internal data structures or of the physical ﬁle system media. The UNIX-compatible ﬁle systemmay be useful for portability and compatibility with other computer systems but could be thesource of denial-of-service problems if the ﬁle system’s services are accessible by both criticaland malicious processes.
Once again, a secure microkernel can help: multiple instances of the UNIX-compatible ﬁle
system can be included in the overall system architecture; each instance serves an isolatedsecurity domain (see Figure 2.6 ). Critical applications in one domain are protected from denial-
of-service attacks from malicious software in a separate domain (e.g., a domain connected tothe Internet). Multi-instance servers need not be expensive in terms of memory resources; thesecure microkernel should offer an ability to share the static, read-only portions of the ﬁleserver (including all its executable code) across domains.
Another potential drawback of a quota system is its static nature. Some complex systems may
have varying resource requirements during their lifetimes and may not have enough memoryfor the union of all the maximum quotas. To address this, a partitioning operating system mustprovide the ability for system designers to create a trustworthy resource manager that canexport resources to, and reclaim resources from, applications on demand. The system designermust be able to specify which critical applications can connect to the resource manager.Malicious software imported into new processes are denied access to the resource managerand governed by quotas.
Alternatively, the system designer can use multiple resource managers, one for each
security domain. The applications within a security domain are free to share its domain-speciﬁc resources that cannot be hijacked by any applications running in a distinctsecurity domain.
Figure 2.6:
Multiple-domain ﬁle system architecture.40 Chapter 2

--- Page 52 ---
Key Point
Partitioning, coupled with the ability to specify resource managers and multiple instance servers,
enables system designers to obtain ﬂexibility where needed and security where it is essential.
2.4.5 Virtual Device Drivers
Key Point
Device drivers are frequently the cause of system reliability problems and the target of hackers;
thus, device drivers are some of the most important components of the operating system toisolate and protect.
Monolithic operating systems commonly allow users and processes to dynamically install
device drivers into the kernel. A faulty device driver can suffer a buffer overﬂow attack wheremalware overwrites the runtime stack to install code into the kernel. Virtual device drivers
prevent these types of attacks because an inﬁltrated device driver can harm only the processcontaining the driver, not the kernel itself. To facilitate the development of virtual devicedrivers, the operating system needs to provide a ﬂexible mechanism for I/O control to thevirtual driver process. The virtual driver, however, must be provided access only to the speciﬁc
device resources that the driver needs to achieve its intended function. Figure 2.7 shows
a couple of examples of virtual device drivers, an interrupt-driven communications driver
Figure 2.7:
Virtual device drivers.Systems Software Considerations 41

--- Page 53 ---
consisting of two threads, and a graphics device driver that only writes to mapped video RAM
without requiring any interrupts.
2.4.6 Impact of Determinism
Operating systems perform a wide range of services on behalf of their client processes and theoverall embedded system. Operating systems schedule workloads across one or more CPUcores, allocate memory, shufﬂe messages between processes, control access to I/O, managepower consumption, monitor system health, and so on. There is much leeway in terms of howthe operating system is architected to prioritize all these activities. Most general-purposeoperating systems are architected to provide good, or fair, responsiveness to all of their clients.While processes may be assigned numeric priorities, they are interpreted as guidelines that donot interfere with the ability of the rest of the system to make progress.
Areal-time embedded system is one whose inability to respond within a certain maximum time
frame constitutes failure. For example, an aircraft ﬂy-by-wire control computer must read and
process a plethora of sensors at ﬁxed regular intervals. If the control application is unable toread and process sensor readings in a timely manner, safe ﬂight is endangered. The B-2 bomberis a great example: its ﬂying wing structure is inherently unstable; the ﬂy-by-wire systemovercomes this instability with continuous split-second control adjustments, independent of thepilot, based on input received from sensors. So-called soft real time simply refers to an inabilityto make absolute guarantees (in other words, not real time).
A real-time operating system (RTOS) is able to guarantee absolute worst-case execution times
(WCET) for services, such as handling peripheral interrupts. Thus, a real-time embeddedsystem must be controlled by an RTOS. To be a true RTOS, the kernel’s operation must be
completely deterministic: the WCET for every kernel service must be bounded and
computable.
Building operating systems to be fully deterministic is difﬁcult. As a case in point, let’s look at
how operating system kernels handle interrupts resulting from the asynchronous arrival of I/Omessages, timer expirations, and other events. Interrupts can occur at any time, including whenthe kernel is in the middle of some critical operation. When a process executes a system call,and the kernel is modifying internal data structures to accomplish the request, interruptpreemption is disabled by the kernel to ensure that another process cannot be context switchedin to execute a system call that could access these internal data structures while they are in aninconsistent state. This uninterruptible code sequence is called a critical section . The kernel
can claim determinism only by being able to guarantee a computable WCET for every criticalsection.
Even simple, self-described real-time operating systems can disable interrupt processing in
hundreds of locations. In one study of a real-time operating system’s interrupt latency,
642 Chapter 2

--- Page 54 ---
researchers estimated that the kernel contained approximately 1,200 critical sections, of which
the researchers were able to statically compute the WCET for approximately half, leavingapproximately 600 disabling sequences that have no known statically computed WCET. Of thecomputable sequences, the researchers discovered triply nested loops with estimated WCET ofmore than 25,000 cycles.
The RTOS analyzed in this study is far less complicated than a general-purpose operating
system such as Windows or Linux. Despite signiﬁcant efforts to reduce typical latencies formany operations, the ability of these monolithic kernels to guarantee determinism remainsinfeasible.
Why does any of this matter for security? The most obvious impact of determinism is the
ability of a real-time embedded system to assure the integrity and availability of its function byavoiding missed deadlines that can lead to system failures. However, only a relatively smallsubset of all embedded systems has hard real-time deadlines.
Key Point
Determinism is required to enforce secure time partitioning.
Security-critical applications must not be starved of execution time by malicious or errantapplications. If a malicious application discovers a weakness in which a certain operatingsystem service call takes an arbitrarily long time to execute in certain circumstances, then thisservice call can be abused by the malicious application to delay critical applications.Furthermore, variations in service call execution times can be used as a covert orside timing
channel , examples of sophisticated security attacks.
A side channel is a mechanism by which a malicious entity can infer sensitive informationabout a critical process simply by observing physical variations caused by that process.Observable physical variations include timing (timing channels), power consumption,electromagnetic emanation, and temperature. Side channel weaknesses, threats, andcountermeasures are frequently analyzed in cryptosystems, which we discuss further inChapter 4.
A covert channel also exploits physical variations but assumes two or more colluders use these
effects to create an unauthorized communications channel for themselves. A covert timingchannel uses variations in timing as the means for communication. Suppose that two isolatedbut colluding applications, Alice and Bob, are each given 10 milliseconds of execution time ina repeating 20-millisecond schedule (see Figure 2.8 ). It is the operating system’s job to ensure
that Alice and Bob get exactly 10 milliseconds of execution time. The kernel will set a timer toexpire every 10 milliseconds and context switch Alice and Bob when the timer interrupt ﬁres.Systems Software Considerations 43

--- Page 55 ---
If Alice is able to temporarily increase its execution time above 10 milliseconds by delaying
the context switch, then Bob will discern its loss of execution time. Thus, Alice can transmita bit of information to Bob for each transit through the schedule: one for a 10-millisecondexecution window and zero for a sub-10-millisecond window. This is a high-bandwidth covertchannel: a 128-bit private encryption key is disclosed in under three seconds.
Alice can use an operating system service call as the means by which to delay the context
switch. The service call acts as a critical section delaying the scheduler from switching to Bob.Thus, Alice can execute a system call near the end of its execution window to accomplish thisdelay (see Figure 2.9 ).
The obvious countermeasure to this timing attack is to place a time buffer between Alice andBob equal to the length of the longest possible service call. Thus, regardless of what system callit attempts, Alice cannot delay the start of Bob’s time partition.
This is why determinism is security relevant. If Alice can ﬁnd a system call that, under certain
circumstances, executes longer than expected, then Alice can use that system call as a coverttiming channel. Not all embedded systems need to worry about the threat of timing channels,but those that do should obtain a WCET analysis from the operating system vendor. In addition,some security evaluations and certiﬁcations require a rigorous analysis of covert channels fromall applicable physical sources within the embedded system. By detecting and measuringcovert channel bandwidth, designers can determine the need for and/or feasibility of speciﬁccountermeasures.
Figure 2.8:
Simple partition schedule.
Figure 2.9:
Malicious use of operating system service calls to perpetrate a timing attack between partitions.44 Chapter 2

--- Page 56 ---
2.4.7 Secure Scheduling
Embedded systems developers familiar with real-time operating systems will note that the
scheduling approach described in the preceding section is unlike the typical priority-basedpreemptive scheduler that uses developer-assigned priorities for Alice and Bob. Suppose Aliceis assigned priority 100, higher than Bob’s priority of 50. As long as Alice continues to execute,Alice runs ahead of Bob (assuming a single processing core). Priority-based scheduling fails toprovide secure time partitioning: Alice can easily starve Bob of execution time by spinning,and Alice and Bob can modulate their CPU utilization to trivially form a high-bandwidthcovert timing channel.
The execution window approach described in the previous section is known as partition
scheduling . Depending on the implementation, a time partition may include a single process or
a collection of related processes that can safely share a portion of CPU time. The operating
system may permit the system designer to use numeric priorities or other schedulingparameters to control how the time window is spread across the partition’s constituentprocesses or threads (see Figure 2.10 ).
It may also be possible to assign certain trusted processes into more than one executionwindow.
There are numerous forms of partition scheduling; from a security perspective, the important
consideration is that untrusted processes not be able to modify the system-deﬁned schedule.Secure time partitioning is a critical feature of separation kernels; not all microkernels providesecure time partitioning.
The problem inherent in typical RTOS thread schedulers is that they are ignorant of the process
or address space in which the threads reside. Suppose that Alice executes in a statistics
Figure 2.10:
Partition scheduling.Systems Software Considerations 45

--- Page 57 ---
gathering process while critical thread Bob executes in a call processing process. The two
applications are partitioned and protected in the space domain, but not in the time domain.Designers of secure systems require the ability to guarantee that the runtime characteristics ofthe statistics gathering application cannot possibly affect the runtime characteristics of the callprocessing system. Thread schedulers simply cannot make this guarantee. Let’s considera situation in which Bob normally gets all the runtime it needs by making it higher priority thanAlice or any of the other threads in the statistics gathering application. Due to a bug or poordesign or improper testing, Bob may lower its own priority (the ability to do so is available withpractically all thread schedulers), causing the thread in the statistics gathering application togain control of the processor’s runtime. Similarly, Alice may raise its priority above the priorityof Bob with the same effect. The only way to guarantee that the threads in different criticalityaddress spaces cannot affect each other is to provide an address space level, or partition,scheduler.
Designers of safety critical software have known this requirement for a long time. The
partition-scheduling concept is a major part of ARINC Speciﬁcation 653, an AvionicsApplication Software Standard Interface. The ARINC 653 partition scheduler executes timepartitions according to a timeline established by the system designer. Each address space isprovided one or more windows of execution within the repeating timeline. During eachwindow, all the threads in the other partitions are not runnable; only the threads within thecurrently partition are runnable (and typically are scheduled according to the standard threadscheduling rules). When the call processing application’s window is active, its processingresource is guaranteed; the statistics gathering application cannot run and take away processingtime from the critical application. Although not speciﬁed in ARINC 653, a prudent addition tothe implementation is to provide the concept of a background partition. When no runnablethreads exist within the active partition, the partition scheduler should be able to runbackground threads, if any, in the background partition instead of idling. A sample backgroundthread might be a low-priority diagnostic agent that runs occasionally but does not have hardreal-time requirements. Attempts have been made to add partition scheduling on top ofcommercial off-the-shelf operating systems by selectively halting all the threads in the activepartition and then running all the threads in the next partition. Thus, partition-switching time islinear with the number of threads in the partitions: an unacceptably poor implementation. Thekernel must ensure a constant time, minimal latency partition switch.
2.5 Access Control and Capabilities
All operating systems provide some form of access control for processes. Embedded systemscontain a plethora of resources: communications, ﬁles, processes, various devices, memory,and more. An important goal of security design is to ensure that applications are able to accessthe resources they need and are disallowed to access resources they do not need.46 Chapter 2

--- Page 58 ---
Key Point
Many security problems are caused by poor access control architecture and/or implementation
within the operating system or improper use of access control facilities by the embedded system
designer.
At a coarse level, access control policies can be divided into two classes: discretionary access
control (DAC) and mandatory access control (MAC). Both have their place in secure
embedded systems design.
An example of a DAC is a UNIX ﬁle: a process or thread can, at its sole discretion, modify the
permissions on a ﬁle it owns, thereby permitting access to the ﬁle by another process in thesystem. DACs are useful for some kinds of objects in some kinds of systems. But an operatingsystem must go one big step further for security and provide MAC of critical system objects.A MAC is managed by the system and cannot be modiﬁed by users or processes. For example,let’s consider a communications device managed by a call processing application. The systemdesigner must be able to conﬁgure the system such that the call processing application, andonly the call processing application, has access to this device. Another application in thesystem cannot dynamically request and obtain access to this device. And the call processingprogram cannot dynamically provide access to the device to any other application in thesystem. The access control is enforced by the kernel, is non-bypassable by application code,and is thus mandatory. Mandatory access control provides guarantees. Discretionary accesscontrols are only as effective as the applications using them.
The combination of mandatory and discretionary access controls is often required to
implement sophisticated embedded systems. For example, mandatory access controls may beused to divide system resources across multiple security domains such that no applicationwithin a security domain may access unauthorized resources. However, within a securitydomain, discretionary access controls may be used to provide a more ﬂexible sharing ofresources.
DACs and MACs can come in many ﬂavors; access control decisions may be based on
a practically inﬁnite combination of subject (user/process) and object (device) attributes, roles,and states.
2.5.1 Case Study: Secure Web Browser
Access control enforces the principle of least authority over the processes and resources in anembedded system. When high-proﬁle security vulnerabilities caused by software ﬂaws incommon operating systems such as Windows are published, we often make the falseassumption that the software vulnerability deserves all the blame. In truth, it is the system’sSystems Software Considerations 47

--- Page 59 ---
lack of access authority restriction that often is the culprit. A software ﬂaw, properly contained,
may have no security impact whatsoever. Sadly, vulnerabilities in an application are oftenexploited by attackers to gain access to resources that the application should never have had inthe ﬁrst place.
Let’s look at the example of a typical web browser, such as Firefox or Chrome. The browser is a
user-interactive application and therefore needs access to the graphical display andkeyboard and mouse inputs (both of which may be provided via access to a system windowmanager). The browser needs access to the ﬁle system to save ﬁles downloaded from thenetwork or to load ﬁles for browsing. The browser needs executable access to its ownprivate application code and data. The browser needs to be able to launch and/or communicatewith a large variety of plug-ins, such as HTML5 and JPEG renderers. Browser plug-ins areusually implemented using dynamic link libraries (DLLs). DLLs allow an application togain dynamic, programmatic access to external functionality by loading that functionalitydirectly into the calling application’s address space. DLLs are easy to conﬁgure, launch,and distribute.
Unfortunately, DLLs dat least the way they are implemented on most operating systems dare
the quintessential example of poor access control privilege management. DLLs execute within
the calling application’s environment and therefore usually have the same access controlpermissions as has the user. Thus, a plug-in that the user does not trust can launch otherprograms, access any of the user’s ﬁles, access any of the browser’s memory and otherresources, access the networks, and so on. Furthermore, many browser plug-ins are large,sophisticated software programs, riddled with bugs.
A buffer overﬂow vulnerability in a plug-in provides the potential for an attacker’s code to be
executed within the user’s environment. Such attacks occur regularly in the wild. Popularapplications that have been exploited include Adobe Flash, Adobe Acrobat, and JPEGrenderers. A common attack vector is to craft a malicious Flash, PDF, or JPEG ﬁle that, whenbrowsed over the web, causes a buffer overﬂow during the rendering process and maliciouscode to be injected as a result.
Building a secure browser immune to such problems requires a lot more than the use of access
control, but let’s start there (in Chapter 3 we discuss more about how to build secure software).Why should the JPEG renderer have access to a ﬁle system, network, or any other applicationresources beyond that needed to decode JPEG? Let’s assume for now that the JPEG renderercould be implemented as a process whose access to computer resources could be regulatedindependently of the user or the user’s browser application. The input to the JPEG process isa stream of bits representing a JPEG compressed input ﬁle. The output of the JPEG process isthe stream of bits representing the decompressed image. The only resources required by theJPEG process is a little RAM, some processing time, and a communication mechanism bywhich the browser provides the compressed input and receives the decompressed output.48 Chapter 2

--- Page 60 ---
The JPEG process should be disallowed access to anything else dno ﬁles, networks, or even an
ability to launch other programs.
Now let’s assume that the JPEG process is chock full of bugs, including the same sorts of buffer
overﬂow ﬂaws that are the bane to web users the world over. Flaws in the JPEG applicationmay enable a maliciously crafted JPEG image to overﬂow the JPEG process’s runtime stack,injecting malicious code. The code may enable the attacker to corrupt, disable, or evencompletely subjugate the JPEG process to its bidding. However, the attacker cannot access theuser’s ﬁles; launch other programs that could cause damage; or access any other resourcesbeyond the aforementioned, limited scope of the JPEG process itself. Access controlengineering dramatically limits damage resulting from the buffer overﬂow.
Key Point
The biggest reason buffer overﬂows are so damaging is that insecure operating systems and
software development techniques promote the use of ambient authority.
As seen in the insecure web browser example, the plug-in’s authority is ambient because it is
inherited from the user’s encompassing environment. For convenience, developers architect thebrowser so that a plug-in can easily perform functions and access resources on behalf of theuser. It is this excessive authority that results in widespread damage from what should beinnocuous programming ﬂaws.
2.5.2 Granularity versus Simplicity of Access Controls
Key Point
One of the biggest challenges embedded system designers face with respect to access control
security policy is ﬁnding the proper balance between the granularity of policy and the main-
tainability and assurance of policy.
A policy that is overly simple may provide excessive privilege to processes across the system.
A policy that is overly complex may, ironically, introduce security vulnerabilities. Thepolicy speciﬁcation is part of the TCB, and like the source code within the TCB, must becrafted with care.
The modern Linux access control policy framework is called SELinux (Security-Enhanced
Linux). A USENIX research paper reported that the Linux 2.4.19 SELinux sample policyconsists of more than 50,000 policy statements and 100,000 permission assignments across700 subject types.
7This kind of enormous speciﬁcation is simply impractical to assureSystems Software Considerations 49

--- Page 61 ---
and maintain. The researchers state, “We believe that size and complexity of the SELinux
example policy make it impractical to expect that typical administrators can customize it toensure protection of their Trusted Computing Base (TCB) and to satisfy their site’s securitygoals on this TCB.” The excessive complexity of SELinux policies should not be construed asa criticism of the access control framework upon which the policy is built; rather, it is a productof the complexity of the Linux TCB itself. Nevertheless, embedded designers must becognizant of the need to implement manageable, provable policies.
To further explore this important topic, let’s look at access control for ﬁle systems. The
simplest access control policy for a ﬁle system is to allow unfettered ﬁle system access to anyprocess that deals at all with ﬁles. Any process that does not need ﬁle services is disallowed anyaccess to the ﬁle system. Suppose an embedded system has processes Alice and Bob, and Aliceuses a ﬁle system for system event logging and Bob is a real-time process that has no need forﬁles. The access control policy is simple:
Process File System Access
Alice Yes
Bob No
Now suppose that a third process, Charlie, requires ﬁle system access, but never to the sameﬁles used by Alice. If the ﬁle system security policy includes directory-level granularity, thenthe designer can specify isolated sandbox directories, A and C, in which Alice and Charlie canfreely create, read, and write their private ﬁles:
Process File System Access A C
Alice Yes Yes No
Bob No No No
Charlie Yes No Yes
Now suppose that a fourth process, David, is a health monitor that periodically reads the statusﬁles written by Alice. This implies that the security policy must provide not only ﬁle-levelgranularity, but also individual access-type permissions granularity for ﬁles:
Process File System Access A C A/Status Read A/Status Write
Alice Yes Yes No No Yes
Bob No No No No No
Charlie Yes No Yes No No
David Yes Yes No Yes No50 Chapter 2

--- Page 62 ---
Now suppose that Alice is trusted to append status messages to the Status ﬁle, but the system
designer does not want to give Alice the right to delete or truncate the Status ﬁle. This is notunusual; audit logging is often considered a sensitive operation in which access to the audit logis strictly controlled to reduce the possibility of corruption or tampering. The access controlparameters may be extended to include any speciﬁc operation type that can be performed onﬁles:
ProcessFile System
Access A CA/Status
ReadA/Status
WriteA/Status
AppendA/Status
CreateA/Status
TruncA/Status
SeekA/Status
Delete
Alice Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No No No No
Bob No No No No No No No No No No
Charlie Yes No Yes No No No No No No No
David Yes Yes No Yes No No No No Yes No
These tables imply a ﬂat policy encoded with a single bit (yes/no) for each access right.Instead, the access control system may be implemented hierarchically such that access to theﬁle system is required before any requests of the ﬁle system can be made. Then, access toa speciﬁc directory is checked before any requests for ﬁles within the directory can be made.And so forth. Similarly, instead of binary conﬁguration, the access control structure may beimplemented as lists, lists of tuples, and so on; when access to a ﬁle is requested, the systemmay check a list of valid process and operation tuples.
These tables cover only ﬁle system access. In an embedded system, the types of subjects and
objects over which an access control policy may need to preside include communicationsdevices, communications channels to other processes, speciﬁc types of memory, semaphores,timers, and so on. It is easy to see how an access control policy can quickly become toocomplicated to effectively manage.
Ultimately, it is the system designer who is charged with the responsibility of ﬁnding the happy
medium for security policy sophistication. The goal should be to ﬁnd the simplest policy thatprovides the necessary privilege limitation across the system. In practice, most resources willhave a single owner for the life of the resource. Ideally, the security policy for such resourcesshould be encoded with a single entry, whether a bit in a table, XML element, or whateverrepresentation the operating system and/or resource manager employs.
2.5.3 Whitelists versus Blacklists
Simplicity of access control policy is critical in gaining assurance that the policy is completeand correct. Given an object, O, and N processes in the system dP
1,P2,P3,.,PN, of which
M<N require access to O dthere are two ways to specify an access control list of the M
processes authorized to access O. The ﬁrst method, a blacklist , associates with O a list of the
NeM processes that are not authorized to access O. In contrast, a whitelist associates withSystems Software Considerations 51

--- Page 63 ---
O a list of the M processes that are permitted to access O. When access to O is requested by
process P, the security enforcement agent (could be the kernel or a process trusted to manageaccess to O) checks the access control list to see if P is authorized for O. Alternatively, theaccess control lists can be tied to subjects instead of objects. In other words, a whitelist forprocess P includes those objects for which P is authorized.
Key Point
For most objects and resources, whitelists are preferable to blacklists due to the former’s
tendency toward reduced privilege implementation and design.
Blacklists can introduce vulnerabilities by accidentally permitting excessive authority.
Suppose a system event causes a new process, Q, to be created to handle the event. If object O’saccess is controlled by a blacklist, then Q is automatically provided access to O whether or notQ needs it. In contrast, if access to O is controlled by a whitelist, then Q is not automaticallyauthorized for O. The system designer must take explicit action to add Q to the whitelist for Oif Q has a need for it.
Anti-malware packages are essentially a form of blacklist. When a program is introduced into
a system, the anti-malware process compares the program to a list of known maliciousprograms or looks for known malware code patterns. The problem, of course, is that theuniverse of undiscovered (including newly created) malware passes the test. Increasingly,security-minded designers are looking to whitelists to solve this problem. The embeddedsystem can be shipped with a list of known good programs that can be executed. Any programthat fails to match something on the whitelist is rejected. The comparison may include a hashcheck to verify the integrity of whitelisted programs.
Alternatively, the embedded system can enforce a policy that only loads trusted programs,
where trust is established through digital signatures. The system owner must cryptographicallysign a loadable program a priori, and the embedded loader veriﬁes the signature beforeaccepting the program’s adoption into the system. The signature represents the owner’sassertion that this speciﬁc collection of bits is safe to deploy. Of course, this mechanismimplies that the system owner (or an authority delegated to make such decisions) does not signa fraudulent or malicious program. Digital signature technology for authentication is discussedin Chapter 4.
Blacklists should be used only for situations in which there is no practical alternative. A
notable example is the use of revocation lists for communications endpoints on large, rapidlyevolving networks (e.g., the Internet). When a client wants to verify the validity of a server, it issimply impractical to check against a whitelist of valid servers. When a server certiﬁcate isdeemed invalid prior to its natural expiration date (a relatively infrequent occurrence), the52 Chapter 2

--- Page 64 ---
certiﬁcate is placed on a revocation list that is checked during communication session
establishment.
2.5.4 Confused Deputy Problem
Earlier in this chapter, we studied the concept of a web browser made more secure using accesscontrol engineering. The goal was to limit the authority of browser plug-ins relative to thedefault ambient authority of the user that is automatically delegated to the plug-in when it islaunched. Excess privilege through implicit delegation is the cause of another common accesscontrol problem, called the confused deputy , as coined by Norman Hardy.
8
The confused deputy is an application serving some client applications. The server holdsmultiple authorities, each of which is used to access resources for disparate purposes. Forexample, the server has the authority to access an audit log (with a predetermined pathnamewithin the ﬁle system) that records the server’s actions. In addition, the server has theauthority to write an output ﬁle whose name is speciﬁed by a client in its request to the server.The server becomes a confused deputy when the client speciﬁes an output ﬁle whose pathnamematches that of the server’s audit log. Because it has the authority to write its own auditlog, the server fails to detect that the authority is being misused, and the audit log is corrupted.The server was never designed to handle the possible erroneous (or malicious) attempt bythe client to specify an output ﬁle that happens to match the name of the audit log.
The confused deputy is an example of privilege escalation : even though the client should have
the right only to invoke the server to process the client’s output ﬁle, the confused deputy
enables the client to gain an illicit authority to overwrite the server’s audit log.
While there are several possible approaches to solve this speciﬁc test case, an effective general
solution is to bind an object with a speciﬁc type of privilege and force the subjects (clients and
servers) to deal only with these object-privilege tuples. In the preceding example, the server
would be conﬁgured with the “audit log” authority that provides access to the audit log, and theclient would be conﬁgured with a user-speciﬁc authority that provides access to the user’s outputﬁle. The client passes this authority reference into the server upon service invocation. The serveruses this authority to write the user’s output ﬁle. Because the operating system enforces allobject references to be made through these privilege tuples, there simply is no deﬁnedmechanism for a client to refer to the audit log authority. A properly constrained client wouldnever be imbued with this privilege. The beauty of this approach is that the server need not beencumbered with extra code to track distinct access permissions for each required ﬁle access.
2.5.5 Capabilities versus Access Control Lists
The concept of an object reference that provides implicit access to the object is called an objectcapability . With traditional access control lists, an object is referenced with a descriptorSystems Software Considerations 53

--- Page 65 ---
(e.g., UNIX ﬁle descriptor), and separate metadata must be maintained to track the access
rights for that object.
Key Point
A capability acts as both the mechanism for access as well as the access right: there simply is no
way for a subject to access an object if the subject does not possess the object capability.
Capabilities are simple and efﬁcient and promote least privilege secure design. In microkernel-
based operating systems that employ capabilities, IPC endpoints are often the most importantform of capability because IPC is used by clients to request services, either from the kernel orfrom user-mode service providers such as ﬁle systems and network stacks. If a process owns anIPC connection to the ﬁle system, then this connection provides the privilege to requestservices from the ﬁle system. If a process does not possess an IPC connection to the ﬁle system,then the process is unable to request any ﬁle system services (see Figure 2.11 ).
The IPC capability is also completely scalable in terms of the granularity of access it cancontrol. In the preceding example, the ﬁle system’s capability granularity is coarse: a processeither has complete access or not. An alternative would be to use separate capabilities for eachﬁle system volume. Clients with a volume capability are provided access to only that speciﬁcvolume and its constituent directories and ﬁles, and the ﬁle server can use these capabilities topartition the media resources across clients. For ﬁner-grained control, the ﬁle system could usecapabilities for each individual directory and ﬁle or even for individual access permissions(read, write, execute, etc.) for each ﬁle. While increased granularity provides for reducedprivilege, the choice of capability management scheme often has profound effects upon systemcomplexity. And as we have discussed, such excessive complexity may adversely impactsystem security.
Figure 2.11:
Clients 1 and 2 each own a capability for ﬁle system services; client 3 is unable to request
any ﬁle system services.54 Chapter 2

--- Page 66 ---
In most cases, the operating system provider will provide a default capability scheme for any
middleware servers, such as ﬁle systems, that are provided along with the operating system.For user-created application servers, IPC capabilities can be used as the designer sees ﬁt. Theoperating system provider will often offer consultative services to help ensure the bestcapability model for least privilege relative to complexity.
2.5.5.1 Case Study: MLS Resource Manager
It is not uncommon for a capability-based operating system to support access control lists in
addition to capabilities or in combination with capabilities for some services. For example,let’s consider a multi-level secure (MLS) resource management application that manages a setof memory pages at varying security levels. A client process is permitted read access to a pageif and only if the client’s security level dominates (is greater than or equal to) the page’ssecurity level. A client is permitted write access to a page if and only if the client’s securitylevel is dominated by (is less than or equal to) the page’s security level. We also make theassumption that the system is conﬁgured such that clients are able to communicate only withother clients at the same security level or with the MLS resource manager; a client is thereforeunable to transfer capabilities to clients at higher or lower security levels.
To start, each client that is allowed to make requests of the MLS resource manager is allocated
a communications capability to it (see Figure 2.12 ).
When a client requests read access to a page (e.g., by address or name, depending on how thesystem is implemented), the resource manager consults its internal access control list ofmanaged pages. In this example, the access control list consists of tuples of a page capabilityand its associated security level label. Other policies, such as role-based access control, wouldrequire additional attributes within the access control tables.
If the client’s security level dominates the page’s security level, then the resource manager
approves the request and uses its communications capability to the client to transfer to it a newcapability providing read access to the requested memory page (see Figure 2.13 ).
The client can now use the newly received capability to perform as many direct reads of variouspage contents as necessary. The capability provides superior efﬁciency relative to a pure accesscontrol implementation in which each individual access to page content would need to bevalidated against an access control list by the resource manager.
This example demonstrates that practically any access control policy can be implemented on
top of capabilities. Furthermore, this example illustrates how capabilities can be used toprovide both mandatory and discretionary access controls. The capability model is, at its root,a mandatory access control system, because all object ownership and access relationships areenforced by the microkernel. The system designer can create a completely static ownershiprelationship between processes and their own objects. In such a design, no discretionary accessSystems Software Considerations 55

--- Page 67 ---
controls are present. However, if more ﬂexibility is needed, a trusted server can be designed
and imbued with capabilities for which it can manage its own client access control policy(along with capabilities to communicate with those clients). Thus, the capability model cansupport arbitrary discretionary access control systems on top of, or in addition to, mandatorysystem-speciﬁed controls.
Let’s now take this case study a step further and consider the scenario in which the memory
page resource manager is tasked with distributing its pages to other servers that will managea subset of the master resource manager’s pages. For example, the system may implementa dynamic link library management service. When a client wishes to load a DLL, the masterresource manager provides the DLL manager read/write access to a set of pages that will ﬁt thecontents of the DLL. The DLL manager will then provide read-only capabilities of these pagesto clients.
Figure 2.12:
Clients with capabilities to MLS resource manager for requesting memory page capabilities.56 Chapter 2

--- Page 68 ---
Of course, the DLL manager may also implement an independent security policy for access to
speciﬁc DLLs. Separate DLL managers can even be instantiated to manage individual DLLs orsets of DLLs (see Figure 2.14 ). For example, the system may utilize a distinct DLL manager
instance for each security domain. Each DLL manager is trusted to properly distribute its pagesto clients, but the DLL manager’s overall rights are strictly limited to only those sets of pagesprovided by the master resource manager. In this manner, capabilities can ﬂow across multipleintermediaries, providing excellent ﬂexibility in system design, while at the same timeproviding authority minimization for improved security. This combination of ﬂexible,privilege-limited capability distribution occurs often in sophisticated systems. Anotherexample is access to shared network buffers as they ﬂow across the various layers ina communications stack: from network interface driver, to the TCP/IP layer, to TCP/IP clientssuch as individual processes making socket API calls, HTTP clients/servers, and FTP clients/servers.
Figure 2.13:
Resource manager transferring a memory page capability to a client.Systems Software Considerations 57

--- Page 69 ---
2.5.6 Capability Conﬁnement and Revocation
One potential advantage that access control lists have over capabilities is the colocation of
policy with the designation of authority embodied within the policy. Access control requestscome into a server, and the server also contains the access control list for making the accesscontrol decision. The access control list is the single repository of policy information relatingto that service. If a client’s access privilege to a resource within a server must be revoked, thenthe system designer knows that removing the client from the server’s access list will sufﬁce.
In contrast, capabilities do not reside in a single place. Indeed, the ability to distribute
capabilities is an important ﬂexibility advantage over access control lists. But what if a serverdoes not want a capability to extend beyond the client to whom access is granted? How can theserver or the system designer be assured that this capability is never commuted to other clients?And if a client’s authority must be revoked, how is this accomplished when the capability hasbeen distributed beyond the server or even beyond the original client?
In our confused deputy example, the server is entrusted to properly manage the user’s output
ﬁle capability. If, at some point, the system security administrator decides that the server can nolonger be trusted, the user is out of luck; the delegated capability is sitting there for the server to
Figure 2.14:
Separate capability domain example: each DLL manager manages memory page capabilities
for clients within a security domain on behalf of a higher-level multi-level secure memory
page manager.58 Chapter 2

--- Page 70 ---
abuse. Furthermore, since the server can communicate with other clients, it can maliciously
transfer the client’s output ﬁle capability to other clients.
Key Point
Distributed capability systems point to a need for the operating system to provide a means by
which capabilities can be conﬁned within privilege domains as well as a means for revocation.
In a typical UNIX system, processes can easily communicate with other processes using pipes,
ﬁles, sockets, and other mechanisms. File descriptors can be shared almost as easily as rawdata. Because the default policy is to allow communication, a capability system added to UNIXwould lack the desirable conﬁnement property. In contrast, conﬁnement is implicitly providedby the microkernel’s system of protected processes and ownership of capabilities within eachprocess. Newly created processes lack any capabilities. This forces the system designer tocarefully consider conﬁnement domains . If Alice lacks communication capability to any other
process, then Alice’s capabilities are conﬁned to Alice. If Alice and Bob can communicatecapabilities between each other, but neither has a connection to any other process, then Aliceand Bob form a conﬁnement domain for the union of their capabilities. In addition, themicrokernel may provide mechanisms by which processes can communicate (e.g., messagepassing, synchronization primitives) but cannot transfer capabilities.
To illustrate the need for revocation, let’s reconsider the earlier case study of a memory page
manager and its subservient DLL managers. Suppose that the master resource manager decidesthat it must reclaim the memory pages assigned to one of the DLL managers. Also suppose thatthe DLL manager has distributed read capabilities for these pages to a large set of its clients tobe able to provide shared library services. Revocation now implies a requirement to remove theread capabilities from all the affected client processes as well as the read/write capabilitiesfrom the DLL manager itself. Furthermore, the master resource manager has no knowledge ofwhich clients were afforded read access. Thus, a scheme that attempts to record alldistributions of a capability for future revocation is simply impractical.
The microkernel capability system must provide a simple mechanism for a capability’s original
owner (in this case, the master resource manager) to revoke that capability, regardless of how ithas been propagated across client processes. One solution to this problem is reminiscent of howaCþþfunction passes read access to its deﬁned objects to other functions. Instead of passing
the original object, the function passes a reference to the object. Similarly, a process candistribute references to capabilities. These references are used as access descriptors in the sameway as the original object. However, when the owning process issues a revoke operation on theoriginal object, all outstanding references are automatically disabled (see Figure 2.15 ). The
linkages between the references and the original object are stored by the microkernel.Systems Software Considerations 59

--- Page 71 ---
The developer only needs to know to use revocable references instead of transferring the
original object.
2.5.7 Secure Design Using Capabilities
Capabilities provide a compellingly simple way to promote secure design habits. Because thecapability embodies both the designation of a resource as well as its access authority, softwarearchitecture diagrams simultaneously depict the functional interactions as well as the accessrights between subjects and objects. In contrast, a purely access-control-list-based system’sarchitectural design showing the connectivity between subjects and objects would fail toprovide a complete picture of security policy with respect to object access privileges. Theaccess control lists of each resource manager in the system would need to be added to thepicture.
To illustrate, let’s revisit our earlier example of the DLL manager that owns a capability to
a writeable memory region containing library code and the DLL manager’s clients that areprovided read-only access to this memory region if and only if they are so authorized by thesystem designer. Capability-based operating system vendors often provide a graphical tool fordeﬁning the interactions between processes and the resources to which they require access.
Figure 2.15:
Capability revocation example: a high-level resource manager efﬁciently revokes/disables memory
page capability that has been distributed to a second-level server and then onto its client.60 Chapter 2

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 2.16 shows one such tool, Integrate , used with the INTEGRITY operating system from
Green Hills Software. In this screenshot, the DLL server owns the read/write capability to the
memory region corresponding to a library, Libfoo.so . The “MemoryRegion Libfoo.so” box
within the DLL_Server process box reﬂects this ownership. Two other processes in the system,
Client1 andClient2 , are deﬁned to own a read-only capability referencing the memory region.
Arrows connecting the authorized Clients’ MemoryRegions back to the original object reﬂect
this relationship. Note that process Client3 lacks such a capability and thus has no authority or
mechanism to access the shared library. Thus, a simple architectural diagram conveys thefunctionality and authority of clients to access a shared library provided by a server.
The Integrate tool stores this information in an ASCII format ﬁle (see Figure 2.17 ) so that
system designers who prefer can examine or post-process the security relationships within their
favorite editors or utilities. This ﬁle is read in directly by the INTEGRITY build system andincorporated into the ﬁnal image binary itself.
Object capabilities represent the state of the art in operating system access control design.
Capabilities are powerful and efﬁcient. They promote least privilege, component-basedsoftware architectures. And capabilities are easy for both developers and securityadministrators to understand. Capabilities can be used to manage a small set of resources withsingle, exclusive owners all the way up to the most sophisticated policy logic schemes.
2.6 Hypervisors and System Virtualization
The operating system has long played a critical role in embedded systems. A prime historicalpurpose of the operating system is to simplify the life of electronic product developers, freeingthem to focus on differentiation. The operating system fulﬁlls this mission by abstracting thehardware resources dRAM and storage, connectivity peripherals such as USB and Ethernet,
and human interface devices such as touchscreens. The abstraction is presented to thedeveloper in the form of convenient APIs and mechanisms for interacting with the hardware
Figure 2.16:
Secure design with capabilities.Systems Software Considerations 61

--- Page 73 ---
and managing application workloads. The operating system is coupled with a development
environmentd compilers, debuggers, editors, performance analyzers, and so on dthat help
engineers build their powerful applications quickly and to take maximum advantage of theoperating system.
Of course, this environment has grown dramatically up the stack. Instead of just providing
a TCP/IP stack, an embedded operating system must sometimes provide a full suite ofapplication-level protocols and services such as FTP and web servers. Instead of a simplegraphics library, the operating system may need to provide sophisticated multimedia audio and3D-graphics frameworks. Furthermore, as embedded Systems-on-Chip (SoCs) become morecapable, application and real-time workloads are being consolidated. The example discussedbrieﬂy in Chapter 1 of an automotive infotainment system integrating rear-view cameracapability is representative of this trend: the operating system must provide a powerfulapplications environment while responding instantly to real-time events and protectingsensitive communications interfaces from corruption.
Because of its central role, the operating system has sometimes been the battleground between
electronics manufacturers who aim not only to differentiate but also to protect the uniquenessAddressSpace          DLL_Server
      Object       10
  MemoryRegion  Name         Libfoo.so      EndObjectEndAddressSpace
AddressSpace          Client1
      Object       11  MemoryRegion   MapTo   Libfoo.so  Name         Libfoo.so_READONLY  Write   false      EndObjectEndAddressSpace
AddressSpace          Client2
      Object       11  MemoryRegion    Name         Libfoo.so_READONLY  MapTo   Libfoo.so  Write   false      EndObjectEndAddressSpace
AddressSpace          Client3
EndAddressSpace
Figure 2.17:
ASCII format system design representation.62 Chapter 2

--- Page 74 ---
of and investment in their innovations. The smartphone market is an obvious example: silicon
vendors, consumer electronics manufacturers, and service providers at all levels want tocontrol that human-machine interface, which acts as the portal for revenue, loyalty, and brandrecognition.
The trend toward consolidation has posed a signiﬁcant challenge to embedded operating
system suppliers who must navigate the myriad of stacks, interfaces, standards, and softwarepackages. This complexity has also fueled a trend toward open source models to reap thebeneﬁts of a massive, distributed developer base. Linux is the primary success story. However,while Linux has succeeded in gaining dramatic market share, it has also suffered fromtremendous fragmentation. What embedded systems developers have realized is that they mustcustomize and extend Linux to be able to obtain differentiation and platform control. Inessence, these Linux-based efforts have become the new do-it-yourself proprietary operatingsystem for a collection of stakeholders.
The key problem is that the typical operating system abstractions dﬁles, devices, network
communication, graphics, and threads dhave begun to reach their limit of utility. Application
developers and electronics suppliers who become too dependent on one operating system
abstraction environment can ﬁnd themselves in dire straights if the operating system fails tomeet emerging requirements, runs into licensing or IP rights headwinds, or is simply surpassedby another operating system in the market.
Clearly, embedded systems developers need a platform for innovation and differentiation that is
ﬂexible enough to accommodate the inevitable rapid evolution in hardware and softwaretechnology. Imagine a platform that can run two completely different operating systems at thesame time on the same microprocessor. Imagine a platform that can run the most sophisticatedconsumer multimedia operating system such as Android while still running a hard real-timecommunications stack and security-critical functions completely protected beyond the reach ofAndroiddall on the same SoC. Imagine a platform that can meet the aforementioned automotive
consolidation requirement: a multimedia automotive infotainment system that also attains a coldboot time in milliseconds to support instant-on rear-view camera (on the same screen as the maininfotainment operating system) and communications over real-time automotive networks (e.g.,Controller Area Network dCAN)dall on the same SoC to save on size, weight, power, and cost.
Key Point
The new level of abstraction needed to cope with increasingly sophisticated, consolidated elec-
tronic systems is the operating system itself, not just the computer’s hardware resources.
Developers need the ﬂexibility to run any operating system, not just any application, with ease,
on the same hardware. The answer to the operating system dilemma is the embeddedSystems Software Considerations 63

--- Page 75 ---
hypervisor, implementing system virtualization . System virtualization enables the hosting of
multiple virtual computer systems on a single physical computer system. These virtual
computer systems are often called virtual machines . The ability to virtualize an entire
computer system enables multiple independent operating systems to execute concurrentlyon the shared hardware platform. These operating systems are often referred to as “guest”operating systems because they are permitted to share the physical hardware as guests ofthe software layer that owns it. This layer is called a hypervisor . Unlike enterprise
hypervisors, the embedded hypervisor is designed speciﬁcally for embedded and mobileelectronics.
The motivations for system virtualization technology in the data center are well known,
including resource optimization and improved service availability. But virtualizationtechnology has broader applications throughout the embedded world, including security-enabled mobile devices, embedded virtual security appliances, trusted ﬁnancial transactions,workload consolidation, and more. This vision is made possible, in part, due to hardware-assisted virtualization technology that now scales down to embedded and mobile devices. Theremainder of this chapter provides an overview of the evolution of embedded hypervisorarchitectures, including both software and hardware trends, and how they affect the security ofsystem virtualization. We also discuss a range of compelling applications for securevirtualization across communities of interest.
2.6.1 Introduction to System Virtualization
Computer system virtualization was ﬁrst introduced in mainframes during the 1960s and ‘70s.Although virtualization remained a largely untapped facility during the ‘80s and ‘90s, computerscientists have long understood many of the applications of system virtualization, including theability to run distinct and legacy operating systems on a single hardware platform.
At the start of the millennium, VMware proved the practicality of full system virtualization,
hosting unmodiﬁed, general-purpose, “guest” operating systems such as Windows, on commonIntel Architecture (IA)-based hardware platforms.
In 2005, Intel launched its Virtualization Technology (Intel VT), which both simpliﬁed and
accelerated virtualization. Consequently, a number of virtualization software products haveemerged, alternatively called virtual machine monitors or hypervisors, with varyingcharacteristics and goals. Similar hardware-assists for system virtualization have emerged inother popular embedded CPU architectures, including ARM and Power.
While virtualization may be best known for its application in data center server consolidation
and provisioning, the technology has proliferated across desktop and laptop-class systems, andhas most recently found its way into mobile and embedded environments.64 Chapter 2

--- Page 76 ---
Key Point
The availability of system virtualization technology across a wide range of computing platforms
provides developers and technologists with the ultimate open platform: the ability to run any
ﬂavor of operating system in any combination, creating an unprecedented ﬂexibility fordeployment and usage.
Yet embedded systems often have drastically different resource and security constraints as
compared to server computing. We also focus on the impact of hypervisor architecture uponthese constraints.
2.6.2 Applications of System Virtualization
Mainframe virtualization was driven by some of the same applications found in today’senterprise systems. Initially, virtualization was used for time sharing, similar to theimproved hardware utilization driving modern data center server consolidation. Anotherimportant usage involved testing and exploring new operating system architectures.Virtualization was also used to maintain backward compatibility of legacy versions ofoperating systems.
2.6.3 Environment Sandboxing
Implicit in the concept of consolidation is the premise that independent virtual machines arekept securely separated from each other (also referred to as virtual machine isolation). Theability to guarantee separation is highly dependent on the robustness of the underlyinghypervisor software. As we discussed earlier and will soon expand upon, researchers havefound ﬂaws in commercial hypervisors that violate this separation assumption. Nevertheless,an important theoretical application of virtual machine compartmentalization is to isolateuntrusted software. For example, a web browser connected to the Internet can be sandboxed ina virtual machine so that Internet-borne malware or browser vulnerabilities are unable toinﬁltrate or otherwise adversely impact the user’s primary operating system environment.
2.6.4 Virtual Security Appliances
Another example, the virtual security appliance, does the opposite: sandbox, or separate,trusted software away from the embedded system’s primary operating system environment.Let’s consider anti-virus software that runs on a mobile device. A few years ago, the “MetalGear” Trojan was able to propagate itself across Symbian operating system-based mobilephones by disabling their anti-malware software. Virtualization can solve this problem byplacing the anti-malware software into a separate virtual machine (see Figure 2.18 ).Systems Software Considerations 65

--- Page 77 ---
The virtual appliance can analyze data going into and out of the primary application
environment or hook into the platform operating system for demand-driven processing.
2.6.5 Hypervisor Architectures
Hypervisors are found in a variety of ﬂavors. Some are open source; others are proprietary.
Some use thin hypervisors augmented with specialized guest operating systems. Others use
a monolithic hypervisor that is fully self-contained. In this section, we compare and contrastthe available technologies, with an emphasis on security impact. Note that this sectioncompares and contrasts so-called Type-1 hypervisors that run on bare metal. Type-2hypervisors run atop a general-purpose operating system, such as Windows or Linux, thatprovides I/O and other services on behalf of the hypervisor (see Figure 2.19 ).
Key Point
Because they can be no more secure than their underlying general-purpose host operating
systems (which are well known to be vulnerable), Type-2 hypervisors are not suitable for mission-critical deployments and have historically been avoided in such environments.
Thus, Type-2 technology is omitted from the following discussion.
2.6.5.1 Monolithic HypervisorHypervisor architectures most often employ a monolithic architecture, as shown in Figure 2.20 .
Similar to monolithic operating systems, the monolithic hypervisor requires a large body of
operating software, including device drivers and middleware, to support the execution of one ormore guest environments. In addition, the monolithic architecture often uses a single instanceof the virtualization component to support multiple guest environments. Thus, a single ﬂaw in
Figure 2.18:
Improved security using isolated virtual appliances.66 Chapter 2

--- Page 78 ---
the hypervisor may result in a compromise of the fundamental guest environment separation
intended by virtualization in the ﬁrst place.
2.6.5.2 Console Guest HypervisorAn alternative approach uses a trimmed-down hypervisor that runs in the microprocessor’s
most privileged mode but employs a special guest operating system partition to handle the I/O
Figure 2.19:
Type-2 hypervisor architecture.
Figure 2.20:
Traditional monolithic type-1 hypervisor architecture.Systems Software Considerations 67

--- Page 79 ---
control and services for the other guest operating systems (see Figure 2.21 ). Examples of this
architecture include Xen and Microsoft Hyper-V. Xen pioneered the console guest approach in
the enterprise; within Xen, the console guest is called Domain 0, or Dom0 for short. Thus, theconsole guest architecture is sometimes referred to as the Dom0 architecture. With the consoleguest approach, a general-purpose operating system must still be relied upon for systemsecurity. A typical console guest such as Linux may add far more code to the virtualizationlayer than found in a monolithic hypervisor.
2.6.5.3 Microkernel-based Hypervisor
Key Point
The microkernel-based hypervisor, a Type-1 architecture, is designed speciﬁcally to provide
robust separation between guest environments.
Figure 2.22 shows the microkernel-based hypervisor architecture. Because the microkernel is
a thin, bare-metal layer, the microkernel-based hypervisor is considered a Type-1 architecture.
This architecture adds computer virtualization as a service on top of the trusted microkernel. In
some cases, a separate instance of the virtualization component is used for each guestenvironment. Thus, the virtualization layer need only meet the equivalent (and, typically,relatively low) robustness level of the guest itself. In the microkernel architecture, only thetrusted microkernel runs in the highest privilege mode. Examples of embedded hypervisors
Figure 2.21:
Console guest or Dom0 hypervisor architecture.68 Chapter 2

--- Page 80 ---
using the microkernel approach include the INTEGRITY Multivisor from Green Hills
Software and some variants of the open standard L4 microkernel.
2.6.6 Paravirtualization
System virtualization can be implemented with full virtualization or paravirtualization , a term
ﬁrst coined in the 2001 Denali project.9With full virtualization, unmodiﬁed guest operating
systems are supported. With paravirtualization, the guest operating system is modiﬁed toimprove the ability of the underlying hypervisor to achieve its intended function.
Paravirtualization is sometimes able to improve performance. For example, device drivers
in the guest operating system can be modiﬁed to make direct use of the I/O hardwareinstead of requiring I/O accesses to be trapped and emulated by the hypervisor.Paravirtualization may be required on CPU architectures that lack hardware virtualizationacceleration features.
Key Point
The key advantage to full virtualization over paravirtualization is the ability to use unmodiﬁed
versions of guest operating systems that have a proven ﬁelded pedigree and do not require themaintenance associated with custom modiﬁcations.
This maintenance saving is especially important in enterprises that use a variety of operating
systems and/or regularly upgrade to new operating system versions and patch releases.
Figure 2.22:
Microkernel-based Type-1 hypervisor architecture.Systems Software Considerations 69

--- Page 81 ---
2.6.7 Leveraging Hardware Assists for Virtualization
Key Point
The addition of CPU hardware assists for system virtualization has been key to the practical
application of hypervisors in embedded systems.
Intel VT, ﬁrst released in 2005, has been a key factor in the growing adoption of full
virtualization throughout the enterprise-computing world. Virtualization Technology for x86(VT-x) provides a number of hypervisor assistance capabilities, including a true hardwarehypervisor mode that enables unmodiﬁed guest operating systems to execute with reducedprivilege. For example, VT-x will prevent a guest operating system from referencing physicalmemory beyond what has been allocated to the guest’s virtual machine. In addition, VT-xenables selective exception injection so that hypervisor-deﬁned classes of exceptions can behandled directly by the guest operating system without incurring the overhead of hypervisorsoftware interposing. While VT technology became popular in the server class Intel chipsets,the same VT-x technology is now also available in Intel Atom embedded and mobileprocessors.
In 2009, the Power Architecture governance body, Power.org , added virtualization to the
embedded speciﬁcation within the Power Architecture version 2.06 Instruction Set
Architecture (ISA). At the time of this writing, Freescale Semiconductor is the only embeddedmicroprocessor vendor to have released products, including the QorIQ P4080 and P5020multicore network processors, supporting this embedded virtualization speciﬁcation.
In 2010, ARM Ltd. announced the addition of hardware virtualization extensions to the ARM
architecture as well as the ﬁrst ARM core, the Cortex A15, to implement them. Publiclyannounced licensees planning to create embedded SoCs based on Cortex A15 include TexasInstruments, Nvidia, Samsung, and ST-Ericsson.
Prior to the advent of these hardware virtualization extensions, full virtualization was possible
only using dynamic binary translation and instruction rewriting techniques that wereexceedingly complex and unable to perform close enough to native speed to be practical inembedded systems. For example, a 2005-era x86-based desktop running Green HillsSoftware’s pre-VT virtualization technology was able to support no more than two
simultaneous full-motion audio/video clips (each in a separate virtual machine) without
dropping frames. With Green Hills Software’s VT-x-based implementation on similar classdesktops, only the total RAM available to host multiple virtual machines generally limits thenumber of simultaneous clips. General x86 virtualization benchmarks showed an approximatedoubling of performance using VT-x relative to the pre-VT platforms. In addition, thevirtualization software layer was simpliﬁed due to the VT-x capabilities.70 Chapter 2

--- Page 82 ---
2.6.7.1 ARM TrustZone
Key Point
An often overlooked and undervalued virtualization capability in modern ARM microprocessors is
ARM TrustZone.
TrustZone enables a specialized, hardware-based form of system virtualization. TrustZone
provides two zones: a “normal” zone and a “trust” or “secure” zone. With TrustZone, themultimedia operating system (for example, what the user typically sees on a smartphone) runsin the normal zone while security-critical software runs in the secure zone. Although securezone supervisor mode software is able to access the normal zone’s memory, the reverse is notpossible (see Figure 2.23 ). Thus, the normal zone acts as a virtual machine under control of
a hypervisor running in the trust zone. However, unlike other hardware virtualizationtechnologies such as Intel VT, the normal zone guest operating system incurs no executionoverhead relative to running without TrustZone. Thus, TrustZone removes the performance(and arguably the largest) barrier to the adoption of system virtualization in resource-constrained embedded devices.
TrustZone is a capability inherent in modern ARM applications processor cores, including the
ARM1176, Cortex A5, Cortex A8, Cortex A9, and Cortex A15. However, it is important tonote that not all SoCs using these cores fully enable TrustZone. The chip manufacturermust permit secure zone partitioning of memory and I/O peripheral interrupts throughoutthe SoC complex. Furthermore, the chip provider must open the secure zone for third-partytrusted operating systems and applications. Examples of TrustZone-enabled mobileSoCs are the Freescale i.MX53 (Cortex A8) and the Texas Instruments OMAP 4430(Cortex A9).
Trusted software might include cryptographic algorithms, network security protocols (such as
SSL/TLS) and keying material; digital rights management (DRM) software; virtual keypad for
Figure 2.23:
ARM TrustZone.Systems Software Considerations 71

--- Page 83 ---
trusted path credential input; mobile payment subsystems; electronic identity data; and
anything else that a service provider, mobile device manufacturer, and/or mobile SoC supplierdeems worthy of protecting from the user environment.
In addition to improving security, TrustZone can reduce the cost and time to market for mobile
devices that require certiﬁcation for use in banking and other critical industries. WithTrustZone, the bank (or certiﬁcation authority) can limit certiﬁcation scope to the secure zoneand avoid the complexity (if not infeasibility) of certifying the multimedia operating systemenvironment.
A secure zone operating system can further reduce the cost and certiﬁcation time, for two main
reasons. First, because the certiﬁed operating system is already trusted, with its design andtesting artifacts available to the certiﬁcation authority, the cost and time of certifying the securezone operating environment is avoided.
Second, because the secure zone is a complete logical ARM core, the secure operating system
is able to use its memory management unit (MMU) partitioning capabilities to further dividethe secure zone into meta-zones (see Figure 2.24 ). For example, a bank may require
certiﬁcation of the cryptographic meta-zone used to authenticate and encrypt bankingtransaction messages, but the bank will not care about certifying a multimedia DRM meta-zone, that, while critical for the overall device, is not used in banking transactions andguaranteed by the secure operating system not to interfere.
TrustZone-enabled SoCs are able to partition peripherals and interrupts between the secure and
normal states. A normal zone general-purpose operating system such as Android cannot accessperipherals allocated to the secure zone and will never see the hardware interrupts associated
Figure 2.24:
TrustZone virtualization implementation with meta-zones within the TrustZone.72 Chapter 2

--- Page 84 ---
with those peripherals. In addition, any peripherals allocated to the normal zone are unable to
access memory in the normal zone.
2.6.8 Hypervisor Security
Some tout virtualization as a technique in a “layered defense” for system security. The theorypostulates that since only the guest operating system is exposed to external threats, an attackerwho penetrates the guest will be unable to subvert the rest of the system. In essence, thevirtualization software is providing an isolation function similar to the process model providedby most modern operating systems.
However, common enterprise virtualization products have not met high-robustness security
requirements and were never designed or intended to meet these levels. Thus, it should come asno surprise that the theory of security via virtualization has no existence proof in commonenterprise implementations. Rather, a number of studies of virtualization security andsuccessful subversions of hypervisors have been published.
2.6.8.1 SubVirt
In 2006, Samuel King’s SubVirt project demonstrated hypervisor rootkits that subverted both
VMware and Microsoft VirtualPC.
10
2.6.8.2 Blue Pill
The Blue Pill project took hypervisor exploits a step further by demonstrating a malware
payload that was itself a hypervisor that could be installed on the ﬂy, beneath a natively runningWindows operating system. Secure boot and platform attestation (discussed later in thischapter) are required to prevent hypervisors from being subverted in this manner.
2.6.8.3 Ormandy
Tavis Ormandy performed an empirical study of hypervisor vulnerabilities. Ormandy’s team
of researchers generated random I/O activity into the hypervisor, attempting to trigger crashes orother anomalous behavior. The project discovered vulnerabilities in QEMU, VMwareWorkstation and Server, Bochs, and a pair of unnamed proprietary hypervisor products.
11
2.6.8.4 Xen Owning Trilogy
At the 2008 Black Hat conference, security researcher Joanna Rutkowska and her team
presented their ﬁndings of a brief research project to locate vulnerabilities in Xen. Onehypothesis was that Xen would be less likely to have serious vulnerabilities, as compared toVMware and Microsoft Hyper-V, due to the fact that Xen is an open source technology andtherefore beneﬁts from the “many-eyes” exposure of the code base.
Rutkowska’s team discovered three different, fully exploitable, vulnerabilities that the
researchers used to commandeer the computer via the hypervisor.
12Ironically, one of theseSystems Software Considerations 73

--- Page 85 ---
attacks took advantage of a buffer overﬂow defect in Xen’s Flask layer. Flask is a security
framework, the same one used in SELinux, which was added to Xen to improve security. Thisfurther underscores an important principle: software that has not been designed for andevaluated to high levels of assurance must be assumed to be subvertible by determined andwell-resourced entities.
2.6.8.5 VMware’s Security Certiﬁcation and Subsequent Vulnerability Postings
As VMware virtualization deployments in the data center have grown, security experts have
voiced concerns about the implications of “VM sprawl” and the ability of virtualizationtechnologies to ensure security. On June 2, 2008, VMware attempted to allay this concernwith its announcement that its hypervisor products had achieved a Common Criteria EAL4þsecurity certiﬁcation. VMware’s press release claimed that its virtualization products
could now be used “for sensitive, government environments that demand the strictestsecurity.”
On June 5, just three days later, severe vulnerabilities in the certiﬁed VMware hypervisors were
posted to the National Vulnerability Database. Among other pitfalls, the vulnerabilities “allowguest operating system users to execute arbitrary code.”
13
VMware’s virtualization products have continued to amass severe vulnerabilitiesd for
example, CVE-2009-3732, which enables remote attackers to execute arbitrary code.
Clearly, the risk of an “escape” from the virtual machine layer, exposing all guests, is very real.
This is particularly true of hypervisors characterized by monolithic code bases.
Key Point
It is important for developers to understand that use of a hypervisor does not imply highly assured
isolation between virtual machines, no more than the use of an operating system with memoryprotection implies assured process isolation and overall system security.
Chapter 3 discusses the Common Criteria security evaluation standard and its Evaluated
Assurance Levels, and what they imply in terms of security assurance.
2.7 I/O Virtualization
Key Point
One of the biggest impacts on security and efﬁciency in system virtualization is the approach to
managing I/O across virtual machines.74 Chapter 2

--- Page 86 ---
This section discusses some of the security pitfalls and emerging trends in embedded I/O
virtualization.
2.7.1 The Need for Shared I/O
In any embedded system, invariably there is a need for sharing a limited set of physical I/Operipherals across workloads. The embedded operating system provides abstractions, such aslayer two, three, and four sockets, for this purpose. Sockets provide, in essence, a virtualinterface for each process requiring use of a shared network interface device. Similarly, ina virtualized system, the hypervisor must take on the role of providing a secure virtual interfacefor accessing a shared physical I/O device. Arguably the most difﬁcult challenge in embeddedvirtualization is the task of allocating, protecting, sharing, and ensuring the efﬁciency of I/Oacross the virtual machines and applications.
2.7.2 Emulation
The traditional method of I/O virtualization is emulation: all guest operating system accessesto device I/O resources are intercepted, validated, and translated into hypervisor-initiatedoperations (see Figure 2.25 ). This method maximizes reliability, security, and shareability. The
guest operating system can never corrupt the system through the I/O device because all I/O
Figure 2.25:
I/O virtualization using emulation.Systems Software Considerations 75

--- Page 87 ---
accesses are protected via the trusted hypervisor device driver. A single device can easily be
multiplexed across multiple virtual machines, and if one virtual machine fails, the other virtualmachines can continue to utilize the same physical I/O device, maximizing system availability.The biggest drawback is efﬁciency; the emulation layer causes signiﬁcant overhead on all I/Ooperations. In addition, the hypervisor vendor must develop and maintain the device driverindependent of the guest operating system drivers.
2.7.3 Pass-through
In contrast, a pass-through model (see Figure 2.26 ) gives a guest operating system direct access
to a physical I/O device. Depending on the CPU, the guest driver can either be used without
modiﬁcation or with minimal paravirtualization. A single device can be shared between
multiple guests by providing a virtual I/O interface between the guest that owns the physicaldevice and any other guests that require access to that device. For network devices, this virtualinterface is often called a virtual switch (layer 2) and is a common feature of most hypervisors.The pass-through model provides improved efﬁciency but trades off robustness: an improperaccess by the guest can take down any other guest, or application, or the entire system. Thismodel violates the primary security policy of system virtualization: isolation of virtualenvironments for safe coexistence of multiple operating system instances on a single computer.
If present, an IOMMU enables a pass-through I/O virtualization model without risking direct
memory accesses beyond the virtual machine’s allocated memory. As the MMU enables thehypervisor to constrain memory accesses of virtual machines, the IOMMU constrains I/O
Figure 2.26:
I/O virtualization using pass-through.76 Chapter 2

--- Page 88 ---
memory accesses (especially DMA), whether they originate from software running in virtual
machines or the external peripherals themselves (see Figure 2.27 ).
IOMMUs are becoming increasingly common in embedded microprocessors, such as Intel Core,Freescale QorIQ, and ARM Cortex A15. Within Intel processors, the IOMMU is referred to asIntel Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O (Intel VT-d). On Freescale’s virtualization-enabled QorIQ processors such as the P4080, the IOMMU is referred to as the Peripheral AccessManagement Unit (PAMU). On Cortex A15 (and other ARM cores that support the ARMVirtualization Extensions
14), the IOMMU is not part of the base virtualization speciﬁcation.
Rather, ARM Ltd. has a separate intellectual property offering, called a System MMU (SMMU),which is optionally licensable by ARM semiconductor manufacturers. In addition, themanufacturer may use a custom IOMMU implementation instead of the ARM System MMU. Inaddition, ARM TrustZone provides a form of IOMMU between the normal and secure zones ofan ARM processor; normal zone accesses made by the CPU or by peripherals allocated to thenormal zone are protected against accessing memory in the secure zone.
The IOMMU model enables excellent performance efﬁciency with increased robustness
relative to a pass-through model without IOMMU. However, IOMMUs are a relatively newconcept.
Key Point
A number of vulnerabilities (ways to circumvent protections) have been discovered in IOMMUs
and must be worked around carefully with the assistance of a systems software/hypervisorsupplier.
Figure 2.27:
IOMMU is used to sandbox device-related memory accesses.Systems Software Considerations 77

--- Page 89 ---
In most vulnerability instances, a faulty or malicious guest is able to harm security via device,
bus, or chipset-level operations other than direct memory access. Researchers at Green HillsSoftware, for example, have discovered ways for a guest operating system to access memorybeyond its virtual machine, deny execution service to other virtual machines, install amalicious hypervisor below the default system hypervisor (an attack described later in thischapter), and take down the entire computer dall via IOMMU-protected I/O devices. For high-
reliability and/or security-critical applications, the IOMMU must be applied in a different waythan the traditional pass-through approach in which the guest operating system has unfetteredaccess to the I/O device. The myriad of trade-offs for use of the IOMMU are beyond the scopeof this book; consult a hypervisor vendor to understand the options for use of the IOMMU andI/O virtualization in general.
A major downside of a pass-through approach (with or without the IOMMU) is that it
prevents robust sharing of a single I/O device across multiple virtual machines. The virtualmachine that is assigned ownership of the pass-through device has exclusive access, and anyother virtual machines must depend on the owning virtual machine to forward I/O. If theowning virtual machine is compromised, all virtual machines will be denied servicing forthat device.
2.7.4 Shared IOMMU
This deﬁciency has led to emerging technologies that provide an ability to share a single I/Odevice across multiple guest operating systems using the IOMMU and hardware partitioningmechanisms built into the device I/O complex (e.g., chipset plus the peripheral itself). Oneexample of shareable, IOMMU-enabled, pass-through devices is Intel processors equippedwith Intel Virtualization Technology for Connectivity (Intel VT-c) coupled with PCI-expressEthernet cards implementing Single-Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV), a PCI-SIG standard.With such a system, the hardware takes care of providing independent I/O resources, such asmultiple packet buffer rings, and some form of quality of execution service among the virtualmachines. This mechanism lends itself well to networking devices such as Ethernet, Rapid I/O,and Fibre Channel; however, other approaches are required for secure, independent sharing ofperipherals such as graphics cards, keyboards, and serial ports. Nevertheless, it is likely that
hardware-enabled, IOMMU-protected, shareable network device technology will grow in
popularity across embedded processors.
2.7.5 IOMMUs and Virtual Device Drivers
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the importance of virtual device drivers in limitingprivilege and promoting robust system design. The ideal virtual device driver requires verylittle device-speciﬁc code to reside within the supervisor-mode kernel: the interrupt serviceroutine (ISR) and, in the case of network devices, access to direct memory access (DMA)78 Chapter 2

--- Page 90 ---
programming registers. The ISR must be in the kernel (the interrupt vector is executed by the
hardware in supervisor mode). The DMA programming is often kept in the kernel because theoperation must be trusted: access to DMA registers enables the driver to overwrite any physicalmemory location, even the kernel itself.
Unfortunately, the virtual driver approach still leaves a bit of device-speciﬁc code in the kernel.
For improved maintainability and a cleaner architecture, it would be better if the DMAprogramming could reside in user mode without increasing the driver’s privilege. An IOMMUenables the DMA programming to reside in the virtual device driver. Perhaps most importantly,by enabling direct access to memory-mapped device registers and DMA programming, theIOMMU promotes a purer form of virtual device driver architecture without sacriﬁcingperformance efﬁciency.
2.7.6 Secure I/O Virtualization within Microkernels
As discussed earlier, virtual device drivers are commonly employed by microkernel-styleoperating systems. Microkernel-based hypervisors are also well suited to secure I/Ovirtualization: instead of the typical monolithic approach of placing device drivers into thehypervisor itself or into a special-purpose Linux guest operating system (the Dom0 methoddescribed earlier), the microkernel-based hypervisor uses small, reduced-privilege, nativeprocesses for device drivers, I/O multiplexors, health managers, power managers, and othersupervisory functions required in a virtualized environment. Each of these applications isprovided only the minimum resources required to achieve its intended function, fosteringsecure embedded system designs. Figure 2.28 shows the system-level architecture of
a microkernel-based hypervisor used in a multicore networking application that must securelymanage Linux control plane functionality alongside high-throughput, low-latency data planepacket processing within virtual device drivers.
Without virtualization, the preceding application could be implemented with a dual Linux/
RTOS conﬁguration in which the control and data plane operating systems are statically bound
Figure 2.28:
Virtual device drivers in microkernel-based system virtualization architecture.Systems Software Considerations 79

--- Page 91 ---
to a set of independent cores. This is referred to an Asymmetric Multiprocessing (AMP)
approach. One advantage of virtualization over an AMP division of labor is the ﬂexibility ofchanging the allocation of control and data plane workloads to cores. For example, in a normalmode of operation, the architect may want to use only a single core for control and all othercores for data processing. However, the system can be placed into management mode in whichLinux needs four cores (SMP) while the data processing is temporarily limited. Thevirtualization layer can handle the reallocation of cores seamlessly under the hood, somethingthat a static AMP system cannot support.
Security can also be improved by adding applications, or even separate virtual machines (the
virtual appliances concept described earlier in this chapter), which perform a dedicatedsecurity function such as anti-malware or ﬁrewalling.
Increases in software and system complexity and connectivity are driving the evolution in how
embedded systems manage I/O and in the architecture of the operating systems and hypervisorsthat are responsible for ensuring their security. The combination of a reduced-privilege,component-based designs as well as intelligent I/O virtualization to enable secure consolidationwithout sacriﬁcing efﬁciency will remain a focus of systems software suppliers in meeting theﬂexibility, scalability, and robustness demands of next-generation embedded systems.
2.8 Remote Management
When an embedded system fails in the ﬁeld, developers (and sometimes government forensicsteams) are tasked with determining the cause of failure. A ﬂight recorder is a well-known ﬁelddiagnostic system: the end product (airplane) is shipped with a built-in diagnostic capability(the black box). Yet a burgeoning class of embedded devices requires ﬁeld diagnostic andmanagement capabilities. Unlike the black box, which is a purely forensic tool, an activenetwork connection is required in many systems. This connection enables technicians toinspect a ﬁelded system to locate the source of anomalous behavior such as loss of function orperformance degradation, install patches or other software upgrades, perform automatedaudits, change conﬁguration, or execute a plethora of other management duties. Furthermore,with the increasing availability of network services built into embedded systems, devicemanagement can be conveniently discharged via the Internet. A home’s cable or satellite boxhas a network connection that most likely has been used to carry out both remote diagnosticsand ﬁrmware upgrades. Device management functionality has been transformational,
increasing product lifetime, reliability, serviceability, and customer satisfaction while reducing
maintenance cost and total cost of ownership.
A great example of the power of remote management is the Mars Pathﬁnder: remote
management saved the 1997 mission from disaster when a malfunction was diagnosed down toa software defect that was remedied with a patch installed via radio link from Earth.80 Chapter 2

--- Page 92 ---
2.8.1 Security Implications
The hacker’s ambition: locate a vulnerability that, when properly manipulated, provides access
into a computer system for nefarious purposes. Over time, remote network exploits havebecome increasingly sophisticated. In April 2010, IBM security researcher Mark Dowd wonacclaim with his 25-page report detailing an astoundingly convoluted set of steps that could betaken to exploit a web access vulnerability, previously believed to be innocuous, in Adobe’subiquitous Flash program.
15
Key Point
Remote device management is the answer to the hacker’s wildest dreams: the embedded system is
imbued not only with Internet access, but also a means to remotely modify and patch software.
No Byzantine attack vector required; just get past the basic operating system controls, and the
embedded device becomes a playground of iniquity.
In Chapter 1, we brieﬂy described the VxWorks remote management vulnerability in which an
operating system diagnostics port is commonly left open for access by any novice hacker toexploit. This vulnerability is so widespread that it is unlikely the Internet will ever be fullyscrubbed of devices containing this ﬂaw. In the case of the VxWorks ﬂaw, the remotediagnostics connection trivially enables a hacker to install malware, even rooting or replacingthe operating system itself (see Figure 2.29 ). A basic defense is to guard the remote
management port with strong authentication, using standard network security protocols such asTLS/SSL or IKE/IPsec (both described in Chapter 5). First, the remote embedded system mustauthenticate the computer used by the remote administrator. This ensures that only known,trusted administrative computers are used to access the embedded system for managementpurposes. Second, if management commands are invoked by a human operator, then theoperator must be strongly authenticated to the management computer locally prior toestablishing the remote connection. Once the operator is authenticated, SSL or IPsec will useauthenticated encryption to protect the integrity and conﬁdentiality of remote managementcommands and data.
Figure 2.29:
Malware insertion into embedded system via remote management port.Systems Software Considerations 81

--- Page 93 ---
Of course, hacking the management computer may render useless the aforementioned network
security protections. For example, malware within the host computer’s operating system canpiggyback over the encrypted connection to inﬁltrate the embedded system. Extreme care mustbe taken to protect the management computer from the Internet or other open networkaccessible to hackers. Ideally, management workstations are dedicated to their purpose andnever connected to the Internet. Using an insecure operator workstation to administer a remoteembedded system is akin to putting a padlock on a safe built from cardboard. One example isfound in arguably the most famous remote management system in the world: Windows Update.Windows Update is designed to unobtrusively and remotely feed a personal computer with thelatest validated security patches. Yet hackers have commandeered this facility to uploadunauthorized software.
An SSL connection is only the tip of the iceberg in ensuring that embedded systems are
developed properly to enable secure remote management. Insider threats and developmentﬂaws can cause an embedded system to be ﬁelded with vulnerabilities that turn a remotemanagement channel into a powerful hacker access method. A secure development process toaddress these threats is a focus of Chapter 3. Without proper assurance that includes testing atthe binary level, secure delivery, and other controls, developers can insert back doors usinga wide range of proven techniques. A secure device management solution prevents maliciouscode insertion by employing high-assurance authentication and digital signatures:unauthorized IT administrators, technicians, janitors, and users cannot circumvent themandatory access controls imposed by the system.
While developers can employ a high-assurance development process for their own software,
how can developers protect against vulnerabilities in third-party operating systems, manyof which are shipped in binary form only and lack any security provenance, pedigree, orindemniﬁcation? Since the operating system often provides the network securitycapabilities described earlier, this is obviously a critical issue.
Key Point
System virtualization can provide an effective solution to the problem of incorporating or retro-
ﬁtting secure remote management to embedded systems: the legacy operating environment isuplifted into a virtual machine, securely isolated from remote management functions, such asconnection authentication and conﬁguration management, provided by a trustworthy hypervisor.
In fact, the device management software can be used to monitor, conﬁgure, and patch the
legacy operating system kernel itself (see Figure 2.30 ).
In many cases, a secure device management solution involves consulting services to ensurethat the appropriate set of security components is integrated and deployed in a robust and82 Chapter 2

--- Page 94 ---
cost-effective manner into end devices. Given the increasing ﬁnancial, safety, and security risks
associated with remote access, many embedded and mobile device makers are rethinking theirdevice management strategy. System virtualization is one potentially powerful approach toaddressing the secure remote management challenge.
2.9 Assuring Integrity of the TCB
2.9.1 Trusted Hardware and Supply Chain
We now turn to a critical systems-level security threat that can render impotent even the mostperfectly implemented, absolutely secure software. Embedded system security requiresintegrity of the TCB (trusted operating system and any trusted applications and middleware,including data protection protocols discussed in Chapter 5).
For example, a virtual memory operating system depends on the fact that no unauthorized
entities can access memory that the operating system allocates to a speciﬁc process using themicroprocessor memory management and protection hardware. If the operating system isbooted up on malicious hardware that exposes certain memory locations (e.g., by sending thecontents of that memory over an attached Ethernet interface), then obviously the systemsecurity policies enforced by the operating system are moot.
Attacks on hardware components, subsystems, and peripherals are not far fetched. Numerous
reports of counterfeit and subverted hardware have occurred over the years. In 2007, someMaxtor/Seagate hard drives were found to have a pre-installed (by the contract manufacturer)virus that would send data stored on the drive to malicious websites.
16A hidden “kill switch”
inserted into a ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA) during its design was allegedly used todisable radar systems during a military attack.
17
Figure 2.30:
Device management architecture for legacy systems.Systems Software Considerations 83

--- Page 95 ---
Key Point
Embedded system developers must do all they can to ensure the trustworthiness of the hardware
supply chain.
Supply chain and manufacturing security is a complicated topic in itself and is beyond the
scope of this book. The reality is that most embedded systems organizations do the bestthey can by purchasing from reliable suppliers and take some risk with respect to trustinghardware.
2.9.2 Secure Boot
Key Point
Beyond trusted hardware, we must ensure that the trusted ﬁrmware/software cannot be
subverted during the boot process.
Platform ﬁrmware attacks are far less difﬁcult and expensive to perpetrate than supply
chain attacks and represent an important threat that all embedded systems developersmust consider. The act of establishing a secure initial state is often referred to assecure boot .
If the hardware and boot loader have the capability to load the system ﬁrmware (operatingsystem, hypervisor, entire TCB) from an alternative device, such as USB, rather than theintended, trusted device (e.g., Flash), then an attacker with access to the system can boot an eviloperating system that may act like the trusted operating system but with malicious behavior,such as disabling network authentication services or adding backdoor logins. Alternatively, an
evil hypervisor can be booted, and the hypervisor can then launch the trusted operating system
within a virtual machine. The evil hypervisor has complete access to RAM and hence cansilently observe the trusted environment, stealing encryption keys or modifying the systemsecurity policy. King et al., provide a good example of this attack in a paper that describesSubVirt, a malware hypervisor.
10Another infamous attack, called the Blue Pill, extended the
SubVirt approach to create a permanent rootkit that could easily be launched on the ﬂy usingweaknesses in the factory-installed Windows operating system.
18
2.9.3 Static versus Dynamic Root of Trust
In most embedded systems, a chain of ﬁrmware must be executed to establish the secure initialstate in which the TCB is up and running and controlling system security. Most commonly, the84 Chapter 2

--- Page 96 ---
CPU ﬁrst executes a small boot loader, burned into ROM at manufacturing time. Secure boot
depends on a hardware-based root of trust; in this case, we depend on the fact that the ROMcannot be modiﬁed post-production. The ROM loader will often boot a more functionalsecond-level boot loader residing in internal Flash. For example, many ARM-based embeddedsystems use the popular u-boot boot loader. This boot loader will often boot the primary
operating system or hypervisor that in turn boots its higher-level applications.
The typical secure boot method is to verify the authenticity of each component in this boot
chain. If any link in the chain is broken, the secure initial state is compromised. The ﬁrst-stageROM loader must also have a pre-burned cryptographic key used to verify the digital signatureof the next-level boot loader. This key may be integrated into the ROM loader image itself,installed using a one-time programmable fuse, or stored in a local TPM that may provideenhanced tamper protection. The hardware root of trust must include this initial veriﬁcationkey. Chapter 4 describes the concepts of digital signature, usually implemented with public keycryptography.
The signature key is used to verify the authenticity of the second stage component in the boot
chain. The known good signature must therefore also be stored in the hardware-protected area.The veriﬁcation of the second-level component covers its executable image as well as theknown good signature and signature veriﬁcation key of the third stage, if any. The chain ofveriﬁcation can be indeﬁnitely long. It is not uncommon for some sophisticated embedded andmobile computing systems to have surprisingly long chains or even trees of veriﬁedcomponents that make up the TCB. Figure 2.31 depicts a sample three-level secure boot
sequence. When the veriﬁcation chain begins at system reset and includes all ﬁrmware thatexecutes prior to the establishment of the runtime steady state, this is referred to as a static
root of trust .
In contrast, a dynamic root of trust allows an already-running system (which may not be ina known secure state) to perform a measurement of the TCB chain and then partially reset thecomputer resources such that only this dynamic chain contributes to the secure initial state.Dynamic root of trust requires specialized hardware, such as Intel’s Trusted ExecutionTechnology (TXT),
19available on some (at the time of this writing, higher-end) embedded
Intel Architecture-based chipsets. The primary impetus behind dynamic root of trust is toremove large boot-time components, which must run to initialize a computer, from the TCB.On Intel Architecture-based systems, the BIOS is often an extremely large piece of softwarethat is used to initialize the system. Because it is a large, monolithic piece of software, theBIOS may (and has in some cases been proven to) contain vulnerabilities that can be exploited.By performing the dynamic reset (also sometimes referred to as late launch ) after the BIOS has
initialized the hardware, removing all privilege from the BIOS execution environment, thesystem in theory has reduced its TCB and improved the probability of a secure initial state.Unfortunately, several weaknesses,
20both in hardware and software, that implement the lateSystems Software Considerations 85

--- Page 97 ---
launch mechanism, have been found by researchers, bringing into question the ability to
achieve a high level of trust in complicated boot environments. Furthermore, while the TrustedComputing Group (TCG) has standardized TPM interfaces,
21implementations have yet to
extend far beyond Intel Architecture-based computing environments.
Figure 2.31:
Sample static root of trust secure boot sequence.86 Chapter 2

--- Page 98 ---
Key Point
The good news for secure boot is that most embedded and mobile computing systems rely on
simple boot loaders that lend themselves well to the static root of trust approach that can be
implemented without specialized hardware.
Even a PC-based system can incorporate a custom, secure BIOS developed by embedded
software security experts, if the embedded system’s security is worth that investment. Thereaders should consult a systems software vendor to understand the available options.
Another good example of the importance of secure boot is provided in the discussion of data-
at-rest protection in Chapter 5.
2.9.4 Remote Attestation
Secure boot provides embedded systems developers with conﬁdence that the deployedproduct is resistant to low-level, boot-time ﬁrmware attacks. Nevertheless, a risk may persistin which sophisticated attackers can compromise the secure boot process. Furthermore, anattacker may be able to replace wholesale the deployed product with a maliciousimpersonation. For example, a smart meter can be ripped off the telephone pole and replacedwith a rogue smart meter that looks the same but covertly sends priva te energy accounting
information to a malicious website. Therefore, even with secure boot, users andadministrators may require assurance that a deployed product is actively running the known-good TCB.
When embedded systems are connected to management networks, remote attestation can be
used to provide this important security function. Once again, the TCG has standardized
a mechanism for TCG-compliant systems to perform remote attestation using TPM-basedmeasurements. Network access can be denied when a connecting client fails to provide properattestation. Within TCG, this function is called Trusted Network Connect (TNC).
22However,
a simple, hardware-independent approach can be used for any embedded system.
Let’s assume that the embedded system can communicate to the remote attestation server using
a secure channel, such as IKE/IPsec or SSL (both discussed in Chapter 5). The initial sessionestablishment uses public key cryptography. In particular, the static private key representing theidentity of the remote embedded system is used to sign data that is then authenticated by theattester. As long as this private key and the client side of the secure connection protocol softwareare included in the TCB validated during secure boot, the attester has assurance that the embeddedsystem is running some known-good ﬁrmware. Therefore, the mere act of a successful IKE orSSL session establishment can be used for remote attestation. An improvement to this approach,providing assurance that the embedded system is running a speciﬁc set of trusted ﬁrmwarecomponents, is to have the client transmit the complete set of digital signatures corresponding toSystems Software Considerations 87

--- Page 99 ---
the TCB chain to the attester that stores the known good set of signatures locally. This is more
difﬁcult to implement because the signatures must be computed and saved at manufacturing time,before the embedded product is deployed to the ﬁeld.
2.10 Key Points
1. The operating system bears a tremendous burden in achieving safety and security.2. The foundation of a MILS-based embedded system is the separation kernel, a small
microkernel that implements a limited set of critical functional security policies, includingdata isolation, information ﬂow control, damage limitation, and periods processing.
3. A separation kernel is considered a reference monitor when the kernel’s MILS policy
enforcement mechanisms are always invoked, tamper-proof, and evaluatable.
4. The MILS architecture requires the use of security-enforcing components whose func-
tional requirements meet a high level of assurance.
5. Microkernel operating systems provide a better architecture for security than monolithic
operating systems.
6. Memory protection is a fundamental requirement for robust embedded systems.
7. Virtual memory provides additional security features, including guard pages and location
obfuscation, on top of basic memory protection.
8. System designers must plan for failures and employ fault recovery techniques.
9. Despite memory protection and virtual memory, malicious code can still take down
a critical application by starving it of resources.
10. Partitioning, coupled with the ability to specify resource managers and multiple instance
servers, enables system designers to obtain ﬂexibility where needed and security where itis essential.
11. Device drivers are frequently the cause of system reliability problems and the target of
hackers; thus, device drivers are some of the most important components of the operatingsystem to isolate and protect.
12. Determinism is required to enforce secure time partitioning.13. Many security problems are caused by poor access control architecture and/or imple-
mentation within the operating system or improper use of access control facilities by theembedded system designer.
14. The biggest reason why buffer overﬂows are so damaging is that insecure operating
systems and software development techniques promote the use of ambient authority.
15. One of the biggest challenges embedded system designers face with respect to access
control security policy is ﬁnding the proper balance between the granularity of policy andthe maintainability and assurance of policy.
16. For most objects and resources, whitelists are preferable to blacklists due to the former’s
tendency toward reduced privilege implementation and design.88 Chapter 2

--- Page 100 ---
17. A capability acts as the mechanism for access as well as the access right: there simply is
no way for a subject to access an object if the subject does not possess the object
capability.
18. Distributed capability systems point to a need for the operating system to provide a means
by which capabilities can be conﬁned within privilege domains as well as a means forrevocation.
19. The new level of abstraction needed to cope with increasingly sophisticated, consolidated
electronic systems is the operating system itself, not just the computer’s hardwareresources.
20. The availability of system virtualization technology across a wide range of computing
platforms provides developers and technologists with the ultimate open platform: theability to run any ﬂavor of operating system in any combination, creating an unprece-dented ﬂexibility for deployment and usage.
21. Because they can be no more secure than their underlying general-purpose host oper-
ating systems (which are well known to be vulnerable), Type-2 hypervisors arenot suitable for mission-critical deployments and have historically been avoided in suchenvironments.
22. The microkernel-based hypervisor, a Type-1 architecture, is designed speciﬁcally to
provide robust separation between guest environments.
23. The key advantage to full virtualization over paravirtualization is the ability to use
unmodiﬁed versions of guest operating systems that have a proven ﬁelded pedigree anddo not require the maintenance associated with custom modiﬁcations.
24. The addition of CPU hardware assists for system virtualization has been key to the
practical application of hypervisors in embedded systems.
25. An often overlooked and undervalued virtualization capability in modern ARM micro-
processors is ARM TrustZone.
26. It is important for developers to understand that use of a hypervisor does not imply highly
assured isolation between virtual machines, no more than the use of an operating systemwith memory protection implies assured process isolation and overall system security.
27. One of the biggest impacts on security and efﬁciency in system virtualization is the
approach to managing I/O across virtual machines.
28. A number of vulnerabilities (ways to circumvent protections) have been discovered in
IOMMUs and must be worked around carefully with the assistance of a systems software/hypervisor supplier.
29. Remote device management is the answer to the hacker’s wildest dreams: the embedded
system is imbued not only with Internet access, but also a means to remotely modify andpatch software.
30. System virtualization can provide an effective solution to the problem of incorporating or
retroﬁtting secure remote management to embedded systems: the legacy operatingSystems Software Considerations 89

--- Page 101 ---
environment is uplifted into a virtual machine, securely isolated from remote manage-
ment functions, such as connection authentication and conﬁguration management,provided by a trustworthy hypervisor.
31. Embedded system developers must do all they can to ensure the trustworthiness of the
hardware supply chain.
32. Beyond trusted hardware, we must ensure that the trusted ﬁrmware/software cannot be
subverted during the boot process.
33. The good news for secure boot is that most embedded and mobile computing systems rely
on simple boot loaders that lend themselves well to the static root of trust approach thatcan be implemented without specialized hardware.
2.11 Bibliography and Notes
1. Andersen JP. Computer Security Planning Study ,http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/history/ande72.pdf ; 1972.
2. Liedtke J. Toward Real Microkernels. Communications of the ACM September 1996; 39(9):70e 7.
3. DiBona C, Stone S, Ockman M, editors. Appendix A, Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution .
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly; 1999.
4. Microsoft Security Advisory (2639658). Vulnerability in TrueType Font Parsing Could Allow Elevation of
Privilege ,http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/security/advisory/2639658 ; November 3, 2011.
5. US-CERT/NIST National Vulnerability Database. Vulnerability Summary for CVE-2011-3402, http://web.
nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId ¼CVE-2011-3402.
6. Carlsson M. Worst Case Execution Time Analysis, Case Study on Interrupt Latency, for the OSE Real-Time
Operating System, http://www.astec.uu.se/publications/2002/Carlsson-WCET_Exjobb.pdf .
7. Jaeger T, Sailer R, Zhang X. Analyzing Integrity Protection in the SELinux Example Policy . Washington, DC:
Proceedings of the 12thUSENIX Security Symposium; August 4e 8, 2003.
8. Hardy N. “The Confused Deputy,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review October 1988; 22(4).
9. Whitaker A, et al. Denali: Lightweight Virtual Machines for Distributed and Networked Applications . Boston,
MA: USENIX Annual Technical Conference; June 10e 15, 2002.
10. King S, Peter C, Yi-Min W, Chad V, Helen JW, Jacob RL. SubVirt: Implementing Malware with Virtual
Machines . Berkeley, CA: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy; May 21 e24, 2006.
11. Ormandy T. An Empirical Study into the Security Exposure to Hosts of Hostile Virtualized Environments ,
http://taviso.decsystem.org/virtsec.pdf; 2006.
12. Rutkowska J, Tereshkin A, Wojtczuk R. “Detecting and Preventing the Xen Hypervisor Subversions, ”
“Bluepilling the Xen Hypervisor, ” “Subverting the Xen Hypervisor, ” . Las Vegas, NV: Black Hat USA;
August 7, 2008.
13. CVE-2008-2100. National Vulnerability Database. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId¼ CVE-
2008-2100 .
14. Mijat R, Nightingale A. Virtualization Is Coming to a Platform Near You. White Paper. ARM Ltd; 2010.
15. Dowd M. Application-Speciﬁc Attacks: Leveraging the ActionScript Virtual Machine ,http://documents.iss.net/
whitepapers/IBM_X-Force_WP_ﬁnal.pdf ; April 2008.
16. Maxtor Basics Personal Storage 3200 (PS 3200) virus [205131]. Seagate Knowledge Base, online URL, http://
seagate.custkb.com/seagate/crm/selfservice/search.jsp?DocId ¼205131 .
17. Adee S. The Hunt for the Kill Switch. IEEE Spectrum Magazine, http://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/
design/the-hunt-for-the-kill-switch/ ; May 2008.
18. Rutkowska J. Subverting Vista Kernel for Fun and Proﬁt . Las Vegas, NV: Black Hat Brieﬁngs; August 3, 2006.
19. Intel Trusted Execution Technology (Intel TXT). Software Development Guide/Measured Launched
Environment Developer’s Guide ; March 2011.90 Chapter 2

--- Page 102 ---
20. Wojtczuk R, Rutkowska J. Attacking Intel Trusted Execution Technology . Washington, DC: Black Hat DC;
February 18 e19, 2009.
21. Trusted Computing Group (TCP) Trusted Platform Module (TPM) Main Speciﬁcation. Level 2, Version 1.2,
Revision 116 (in three parts, “Design Principles, ” “Structures of the TPM, ” “Commands”) ; March 1, 2011.
22. Trusted Computing Group (TCG) Trusted Network Connection (TNC) Architecture for Interoperability,
Speciﬁcation Version 1.4, Revision 4, May 18, 2009.
23. Sharon G. Security Expert: U.S. Companies Unprepared for Cyber Terror . eSecurity Planet; July 19, 2002;
online URL: http://www.esecurityplanet.com/trends/article.php/1429851/Security-Expert-US-Companies-
Unprepared-For-Cyber-Terror.htmSystems Software Considerations 91

--- Page 103 ---
CHAPTER 3
Secure Embedded Software
Development
Chapter Outline
3.1 Introduction to PHASE dPrinciples of High-Assurance Software Engineering 94
3.2 Minimal Implementation 95
3.3 Component Architecture 96
3.3.1 Runtime Componentization 98
3.3.2 A Note on Processes versus Threads 99
3.4 Least Privilege 100
3.5 Secure Development Process 100
3.5.1 Change Management 101
3.5.2 Peer Reviews 101
3.5.2.1 Security-Oriented Peer Review 103
3.5.3 Development Tool Security 104
3.5.3.1 Case Study: The Thompson Hack 105
3.5.4 Secure Coding 107
3.5.4.1 Coding Standards 107
3.5.4.2 Case Study: MISRA C:2004 and MISRA C þþ:2008 109
3.5.4.3 Embedded C þþ 115
3.5.4.4 Complexity Control 116
3.5.4.5 Static Source Code Analysis 1173.5.4.6 Creating a Tailored Organizational Embedded Coding Standard 1263.5.4.7 Preparing for a One-Time Retrofit Cost 1263.5.4.8 Allowing for Management-Approved Exceptions to Reduce Regressions 1263.5.4.9 Language Standards Are Never Perfect 127
3.5.4.10 Case Study: Green Hills Standard Mode 128
3.5.4.11 Importance of Management Resolve 1313.5.4.12 Case Study: Netrino Embedded C Coding Standard 1323.5.4.13 Dynamic Code Analysis 138
3.5.5 Software Testing and Verification 146
3.5.5.1 Modified Condition/Decision Coverage 147
3.5.6 Development Process Efficiency 154
3.6 Independent Expert Validation 156
3.6.1 Common Criteria 1573.6.2 Case Study: Operating System Protection Profiles 160
3.6.2.1 Configuration Management 163
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00003-5
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 93

--- Page 104 ---
3.6.2.2 Functional Specification 164
3.6.2.3 Assurance Leveling 164
3.7 Case Study: HAWS dHigh-Assurance Web Server 165
3.7.1 Minimal Implementation 1663.7.2 Component Architecture 1683.7.3 Least Privilege 1683.7.4 Secure Development Process 1693.7.5 Independent Expert Validation 169
3.8 Model-Driven Design 169
3.8.1 Introduction to MDD 170
3.8.1.1 Trends Driving Adoption of MDD 1703.8.1.2 What Is MDD? 172
3.8.1.3 The Potential Benefits of MDD 173
3.8.2 Executable Models 174
3.8.2.1 Formally Verifiable Executable Models 175
3.8.3 Modeling Languages 177
3.8.3.1 The Unified Modeling Language 178
3.8.3.2 The System Modeling Language 1803.8.3.3 Executable UML 181
3.8.4 Types of MDD Platforms 182
3.8.5 Case Study: A Digital Pathology Scanner 183
3.8.5.1 Algorithm Development 186
3.8.5.2 Motion Control and Dynamic System Modeling 1863.8.5.3 Supervisory Machine Control Layer Software 187
3.8.6 Selecting an MDD Platform 191
3.8.6.1 Examples of Commercial MDD Platforms 1913.8.6.2 MDD Platform Choice Is Strategic 1963.8.6.3 Skills 197
3.8.6.4 Impact on Existing Work Flows 197
3.8.6.5 Interfacing with Legacy Code and Off-the-Shelf Software 1983.8.6.6 Code Generation 1993.8.6.7 Runtime Execution Speed 2003.8.6.8 Runtime System Requirements 200
3.8.7 Using MDD in Safety- and Security-Critical Systems 201
3.9 Key Points 202
3.10 Bibliography and Notes 206
3.1 Introduction to PHASEdPrinciples of High-Assurance
Software Engineering
In Chapter 1, we discussed the trend of increased software complexity and its adverse impact
on security and safety. As yet one more example, a Swiss National Railways centralized trafﬁccontrol system was recently reported to contain four million lines of code.
1Complexity strains94 Chapter 3

--- Page 105 ---
traditional reliability techniques, such as code reviews, and implies a growing necessity for
a comprehensive approach to software assurance.
Key Point
Software assurance refers to the level of conﬁdence that the software end user and other relevant
stakeholders (e.g., certiﬁers) have that the security policies and functions claimed by that soft-
ware are actually fulﬁlled.
Simply meeting functional requirements does not achieve the assurance required for security-
critical embedded systems. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss proven techniques fordramatically increasing the assurance of embedded software. Increased assurance decreasesvulnerabilities, improving security, safety, and reliability.
We begin the discussion of secure embedded software development with an introduction to
PHASE, a methodology that can break the vicious cycle of unreliable software.
Key Point
PHASEdPrinciples of High Assurance Software Engineering dprescribes a set of ﬁve principles to
be used in the creation of ultra-reliable software and systems:
1. Minimal implementation
2. Component architecture
3. Least privilege4. Secure development process5. Independent expert validation
Each principle is described, with examples, in the following sections.
3.2 Minimal Implementation
Key Point
It is much harder to create simple, elegant solutions to problems than complex, convoluted ones.
Most software developers do not work in an environment in which producing the absolute
minimal possible solution to a problem is an unwavering requirement. Spaghetti code is thesource of vulnerabilities that run rampant in software and provide the avenue of exploitationfor hackers.Secure Embedded Software Development 95

--- Page 106 ---
As an example, let’s consider an HTML 1.1-compliant web server. Engineers at Green Hills
Software developed a high-assurance web server (HAWS) that used state-driven protocolprocessing instead of the typical error-prone string parsing and manipulation. The result: a fewhundred lines of perfect code instead of the tens of thousands of lines found in manycommercial web servers. The Green Hills web server runs on the high-assurance INTEGRITYoperating system. In 2008, a website running on this platform was deployed on the Internet,and Netragard, a leading white hat hacker organization, was invited to perform a vulnerabilityassessment of the website. Netragard CTO Adriel Desautels reported that the website had “noattack surface whatsoever.” HAWS is covered in more depth as a case study at the end of thischapter.
As another example, let’s consider ﬁle systems. Engineers at Green Hills Software developed
a high-assurance journaling ﬁle system, called PJFS, using a few thousand carefully craftedlines of code. The ﬁle system achieves excellent performance, provides guaranteed mediastorage quotas for clients (important in safety-critical contexts), and employs transactionaljournaling to assure the integrity of ﬁle system data and metadata (and instant reboot time) inthe event of sudden power loss. In contrast, commercial journaling ﬁle systems typicallyexceed 100,000 source lines, with plenty of software ﬂaws.
3.3 Component Architecture
Key Point
An important software robustness principle is to compose large software systems from small
components, each of which is easily maintained by, ideally, a single engineer who understandsevery single line of code.
It is imperative to use well-deﬁned, documented interfaces between components. These
interfaces serve as a contract between component owners and must be created carefully tominimize churn that forces a cascade of implementation, testing, and integration changes. Ifa modiﬁcation to an interface is required, component owners whose components use theseinterfaces must agree, involving common management to resolve disagreements ifnecessary.
Key Point
An important corollary to the component architecture principle is that safety and/or security-
enforcing functionality should be placed into separate components so that critical operations are
protected from compromise by non-critical portions of the system.96 Chapter 3

--- Page 107 ---
It is not enough to isolate security functions into their own components, however. Each
security-critical component must, to the greatest extent practicable, be designed or refactoredto remove any functionality that is not part of its security-enforcing function.
One of the key reasons why overly complex software is difﬁcult to manage is that such a piece
of software is almost always worked on by multiple developers, often at different times overthe life of the product. Because the software is too complex for a single person to comprehend,features and defect resolutions alike are addressed by guesswork and patchwork. Flawsare often left uncorrected, and new ﬂaws are added while the developer attempts to correctother problems.
Componentization also provides the capability for the system designer to make customer-
speciﬁc changes in a methodical way. By focusing on customer and market requirements, thedesigner can make changes by swapping out a small subset of components as opposed to thelarger part of the software baseline. This minimizes the task of regression testing by decreasingthe impact to the overall system. When designers keep this attitude of componentization andinterface deﬁnition in mind, improvements can be made over time with low risk.
Key Point
Componentization provides many beneﬁts, including improved testability, auditability, data
isolation, and damage limitation.
Componentization can prevent a failure in one component from devolving into a system
failure. Componentization can also dramatically reduce development cost and certiﬁcationcost, if applicable, by enabling developers to apply a lower development process rigor on non-critical components while raising the level of assurance for the critical pieces, which are oftena relatively small percentage of the entire system.
Dividing a system into components requires that they have well-deﬁned interfaces. Instead of
modifying the same shared piece of code, developers must deﬁne simple, clear interfaces for
components and only use a component’s well-documented (or at least well-understood)
interface to communicate with other components. Componentization enables developers towork more independently and therefore more efﬁciently, minimizing time spent in meetingswhere developers attempt to explain behavior of their software. Re-factoring a large softwareproject in this manner can be time consuming. However, once this is accomplished, all futuredevelopment will be more easily managed.
Key Point
Ensure that no single software partition is larger than a single developer can fully comprehend.Secure Embedded Software Development 97

--- Page 108 ---
Each partition must have a well-known partition manager. One way to ensure that developers
understand who owns which partitions is to maintain an easily accessible partition managerlist that is modiﬁed only by appropriate management personnel. The partition manager is theonly person authorized to make modiﬁcations to the partition or to give another developerthe right to make a modiﬁcation. By having clear ownership of every single line of codein the project, developers are not tempted to edit code that they are not appropriatelyqualiﬁed to handle.
Key Point
Ensure all developers know who the component managers are.
Component managers develop, over time, a comprehensive understanding of their ownedpartitions, ensuring that future modiﬁcations are done with complete knowledge of theramiﬁcations of modifying any software within the partition.
3.3.1 Runtime Componentization
Usually, the embodiment of a component in the target computer system is a singleexecutable program. Examples of components include Windows .EXE applications andPOSIX/UNIX processes. Thus, complex software made up of multiple components shouldalways be used in conjunction with an operating system that employs memory protection toprevent corruption of one component’s memory space by another partition. Inter-componentcommunication is typically accomplished with standard operating system message-passingconstructs.
Different embedded operating systems (and microprocessors) have varying capabilities in
terms of enforcing strict separation between components. For example, a small, real-timeoperating system may not make use of a computer’s memory management unit at all;multiple software applications cannot be protected from each other, and the operating systemitself is at risk from ﬂaws in application code. These ﬂat memory model operating systemsare not suitable for complex, partitioned software systems. General-purpose desktopoperating systems such as Linux and Windows employ basic memory protection, in whichpartitions can be assigned processes that are protected from corruption by the memorymanagement unit, but do not make hard guarantees about availability of memory or CPUtime resources.
For secure systems, the embedded operating system must provide strict partitioning of
applications in both time and space. A damaged application cannot exhaust system memory,operating system resources, or CPU time because the faulty software is strictly limited to anassigned quota of critical resources. The quota affects literally all memory in use, including98 Chapter 3

--- Page 109 ---
heap memory for the C/C þþruntime, memory used for process control blocks and other
operating system objects, and processes’ runtime stack memory. In addition, the partitioning
policies provide strict quotas of execution time and strict control over access to systemresources such as I/O devices and ﬁles. A more rigorous partitioning of applications at theoperating system level ensures that the beneﬁts of partition management policies used in thedevelopment process are realized during runtime.
Key Point
If possible, use an operating system that employs true application partitioning.
3.3.2 A Note on Processes versus Threads
When developers factor embedded software into components, a natural embodiment of theruntime component is the thread . Threads are ﬂows of execution that share a single address
space with other threads. In most modern operating systems, an address space has at leastone default thread, and the address space with this single thread is often called a process .
Because they are easy to create and the way most embedded programmers learn to employconcurrency, threads often get overused. Furthermore, embedded systems developers oftenhave the mistaken impression that a proliferation of processes will exhaust too manysystem resources relative to threads. While threads are certainly lighter weight thana full-blown process, the distinction has become increasingly less important in modernembedded systems. Another reason for thread overuse can be attributed to the fact that theoriginal real-time operating systems created in the 1980s and early 1990s did not supportmemory-protected processes at all. Developers became accustomed to threads, and theirlegacy lives on.
Key Point
Contrary to popular belief, designers should strive for a one-to-one ratio between threads and
processes.
In other words, each memory-protected component should contain a minimum number of
threads. The key reason is that multi-threaded processes are often the cause of subtlesynchronization problems that result in memory corruption, deadlock, and other faults. The use
of virtual memory processes forces developers to create well-deﬁned inter-process
communication interfaces between components. Each component can be independent unittested by exercising these interfaces. This thread-less component philosophy avoids some ofthe nastiest vulnerabilities that plague embedded software.Secure Embedded Software Development 99

--- Page 110 ---
3.4 Least Privilege
Key Point
Components must be given access to only those resources (e.g., communication pathways, I/O
devices, system services, information) that are absolutely required.
Access control must be mandatory for critical system resources and information. As discussed
in Chapter 2, insecure systems typically allow any program to access the ﬁle system, launchother programs, and manipulate system devices.
For example, browser buffer overﬂow vulnerabilities may enable an attacker to access any ﬁle
because the web browser has the privilege to access the entire ﬁle system. There is no reasonwhy a web browser should have unfettered access to the entire ﬁle system. The web browsereither should have write access only to a dedicated, browser-speciﬁc directory (out of whichthe user can carefully decide what can leave the sandbox), or all browser write requests canrequire user approval via a dialog box. Read access can be limited to a whitelist of ﬁles knownto be required for browser operation. The web browser’s runtime stack should not beexecutable.
Every component of the entire system should be designed with least privilege in mind, and it is
always best to start with no privilege and work up to what is needed rather than start with thekitchen sink and whittle away privileges.
For another example, let’s consider the common operating system function of launching a new
process. One original UNIX method, fork() , creates a duplicate of the parent process, giving the
child all the same privileges (e.g., access to ﬁle descriptors, memory) as the parent. Thedeveloper then must close descriptors and otherwise try to limit the child’s capabilities. Thisrequires an unrealistic prescient knowledge of all system resources accessible to a process.Thus, errors in the use of this interface have often led to serious vulnerabilities.
In a secure operating system, the default process creation mechanism establishes a child without
access to any of the parent’s capabilities for memory, devices, or other resources. The creatorcan systematically provide capabilities to the child, building up a strictly limited privilegeprocess. The child must also obtain its physical memory resources from its parent, ensuring thata process cannot drain the system or otherwise affect other critical processes with a fork bomb.
3.5 Secure Development Process
Key Point
For critical safety- and security-enforcing components, the software development process must
meet a much higher level of assurance than is used for general-purpose components.100 Chapter 3

--- Page 111 ---
The embedded systems developer unfamiliar with the secure development process should
study proven high-assurance development standards that are used to certify critical embeddedsystems. Two noteworthy standards are DO-178B Level A (a standard for ensuring the safetyof ﬂight-critical systems in commercial aircraft) and ISO/IEC 15408 (Common Criteria)EAL6/7 or equivalent. A high-assurance development process will cover numerous controls,including conﬁguration management, coding standards, testing, formal design, formal proof ofcritical functionality, and so on.
Let’s consider a case in which a rogue programmer has the capability of installing into aircraft
engine software a condition such that the engine will shut down at a certain time and date.This software may reside in all the engines for a particular class of aircraft. One aspect ofa secure development process is having separate system and software teams developing theredundant aircraft engine control systems. In this way, systemic or rogue errors create by oneteam are mitigated by the entirely distinct development path. Independence of systems,software, and testing teams in accordance with standards also contributes to this securedevelopment process.
It can be educational to examine the key differences between a high-assurance development
process and a low-assurance development process. This chapter includes a comparison ofclasses of security standards within Common Criteria, the international standard for evaluatingthe security of IT systems.
3.5.1 Change Management
A software project may be robust and reliable at the time of its ﬁrst release, only to endurechange rot over ensuing years as new features, not part of the original design, are hacked in,causing the code to become difﬁcult to understand, maintain, and test. Time-to-marketdemands exacerbate the problem, inﬂuencing developers to make hasty changes to thedetriment of reliability.
Key Point
An extremely important aspect of maintaining secure software over the long term is to utilize an
effective change management regimen.
Some fundamentals of quality change management, such as the employment of conﬁguration
management systems to control and record changes and manage code branches and releases,are assumed and not covered in this book.
3.5.2 Peer Reviews
A critical aspect of effective change management is the use of peer code reviews. A commonpeer code review sequence consists of the code author developing a presentation describing theSecure Embedded Software Development 101

--- Page 112 ---
code change followed by a face-to-face meeting with one or more developers and development
managers involved in the project. The developer presents the software design in question, andthe others try to poke holes in the code. These meetings can be extremely painful and timeconsuming. Audience members sometimes feel compelled to nitpick every line of code todemonstrate their prowess.
Key Point
Use asynchronous code reviews with e-mail correspondence or carefully controlled live meetings.
Componentization drastically reduces the time required for code reviews since the code expertsare almost always the ones modifying their own components. Debates regarding designdecisions are usually avoided. In addition, we advocate limited face-to-face peer reviews alongwith correspondence reviews when practicable. The partition manager applies the changes toa local copy of the software, selects a suitable peer to review the changes, and then makesa review request via e-mail. Soon after, but at a time convenient for the reviewer, the reviewerreviews the code differences at her desk and then sends back comments via e-mail to the author.When the author receives an e-mail indication that the change is approved, the software iscommitted to the conﬁguration management system. If a reviewer rejects a modiﬁcation,the author must correct any discovered ﬂaws or, if she disagrees with the assessment, appeal tothe common manager to referee. The conﬁguration management system must provide for theability to specify the reviewer’s user identiﬁcation as part of the commit comment. Forexample, CVS allows a script to be run during a commit; the script is provided the commitcomment that is parsed for the user identiﬁcation. If valid user identiﬁcation is not found, theconﬁguration management system rejects the commit. Thus, the conﬁguration managementsystem can be used to automate the enforcement of a code review policy. Without such anautomated system, there can be no guarantee that a developer will not commit a change that hasnot been properly vetted.
Key Point
Use the conﬁguration management system to automate enforcement of peer reviews for every
modiﬁcation to critical code.
Recording the reviewer’s identiﬁcation in the conﬁguration management system also provides
an electronic paper trail for security certiﬁcation auditors.
Another advantage of partitioning is the ability to minimize process requirements across the
system. In any large software project, there is a continuum of criticality among the various102 Chapter 3

--- Page 113 ---
pieces of code. By way of example, let’s consider an excimer laser system used in
semiconductor manufacturing. The laser itself is controlled by a highly critical, real-timesoftware application. If this application faults, the laser in turn may fail, destroying thesemiconductor. In addition, the system contains a communications application that usesCORBA over TCP/IP to receive commands and to send diagnostic data over a network. If thecommunications application fails, then the system may become unavailable or diagnostic datamay be lost, but there is no possibility for the laser to malfunction. If both applications werebuilt into a single, monolithic system in which all code executes in the same memory space,then the entire software content must be developed at the highest levels of quality andreliability. If the applications are partitioned, however, the non-critical communicationsapplication development can be subjected to a lower level of rigor, saving time to market anddevelopment cost.
Key Point
Apply a level of process rigor, including code reviews and other controls, that is commensurate
with the criticality level of the component.
Obviously, we do not advocate a free-for-all on components that are not considered critical;
management should use judgment regarding which controls to apply to various software teams.
When the process controls in non-critical applications are reduced, time to market for theoverall system can be improved without jeopardizing reliability where it counts.
3.5.2.1 Security-Oriented Peer ReviewMost peer reviews are spent looking for coding bugs, design ﬂaws, and violations of coding
standards. While these activities contribute to more reliable and hence secure software, mostembedded software organizations do not perform reviews based speciﬁcally on securityanalysis.
When a developer presents a new design or piece of software, the reviewers should consider
security-relevant characteristics. For example:
Least privilege: Can t
 he software be refactored such that the least critical compo-
nents are provided the least amount of privilege in terms of access to resources?Reducing privilege of a component decreases its attack surface and reduces itsassurance requirements, improving efﬁciency in development and certiﬁcation (ifapplicable).Attack potential: Think in terms of an attacker dsystem-resident (malware) or external
(network-borne): where are the access points and weaknesses in the system, and how mightan attacker attempt to compromise them? As in poker, success requires putting one’s self inthe opponent’s frame of reference and training to think like one’s opponent. Over time,Secure Embedded Software Development 103

--- Page 114 ---
developers with this mindset become proﬁcient at predicting attack potential and therefore
can place controls to prevent security failures.Sophisticated attacks: Even if the code under review is not protecting the power grid, let’s
consider advanced security concerns such as side and covert channels, transmissionsecurity, and DMA corruption via system peripherals. Developers trained to considersophisticated attack threats will be better prepared to handle the components that demandhigh robustness against such threats.
Key Point
By making security a part of peer reviews, management will create a culture of security focus
throughout the development team.
In fact, because peer reviews account for a signiﬁcant portion of group interaction in
a development organization, they are an ideal venue for engendering the kind of vigilanceneeded to build secure embedded systems.
3.5.3 Development Tool Security
AnEaster egg is an intentionally undocumented message, joke, or capability inserted into
a program by the program’s developers, as an added challenge to the user or simply just for fun.Easter eggs are commonly found in video games. The Linux packaging tool apt-get has this
bovine egg:
> apt-get moo
(__)
(oo)
/------\/
/| | |
* /\---/\
~~ ~~
.... “Have you mooed today? ”...
Cute. Funny. But what if a developer aims to insert something malicious? How can an
organization be protected from this insider threat? How can the organization ensure thatmalware is not inserted by third-party middleware or the compiler used to build the software?
Key Point
Developers and users require assured bit provenance: conﬁdence that every single binary bit of
production software originates from its corresponding known-good version of source code.
This is a critical aspect of software security that many embedded systems developers never
consider. High-assurance security and safety standards, such as DO-178B Level A (aircraft104 Chapter 3

--- Page 115 ---
safety) and Common Criteria Evaluated Assurance Level 7 (IT security), require the ability to
re-create the exact bits of the ﬁnal production software from the conﬁguration managementsystem. Ancillary items, not just product source code, must be conﬁguration managed. Forexample, any support ﬁles (e.g., scripts) used for the creation of production images must bestrictly controlled. And the tool chain used to build the software must also be covered. Failureto rigorously control the entire development system can lead to serious vulnerabilities, bothinadvertent and malicious.
3.5.3.1 Case Study: The Thompson Hack
One such subversion was performed by Ken Thompson and reported famously in his Turing
Award acceptance speech. Thompson inserted a back door into UNIX by subverting thecompiler used to build UNIX. Thompson’s modiﬁcation caused the UNIX login password
veriﬁcation to match on a string of Thompson’s choosing in addition to the normal databasevalidation. In essence, Thompson changed the UNIX login program that used to looksomething like this:
int login(unsigned int uid, char *password)
{
if (strcmp(pass_dbase(uid), password) == 0)
return true; // password match, login ok
else
return false; // password mismatch, login fail
}
into something that looks like this:
int login(unsigned int uid, char *password)
{
if (strcmp(pass_dbase(uid), password) == 0 ||
strcmp( “ken_thompson ”, password) == 0))
return true; // password match, login ok
else
return false; // password mismatch, login fail
}
However, changing the UNIX source code would be too easy to detect, so Thompson modiﬁed
the compiler to insert the back door. With compiler insertion, examination of the UNIX sourcecode would not be sufﬁcient to detect the bug. The compiler Trojan would be a code fragmentthat examines the internal syntax tree of the compiled program looking for the speciﬁc login
password check code sequence and replacing it with the back door:
if (!strcmp(function_name(), “login ”)) {
if (OBJ_TYPE(obj) == IF_STATEMENT &&
OBJ_TYPE(obj->left) == FUNCTION &&
!strcmp(OBJ_NAME(obj->left), “strcmp ”)) {
Object func = GET_ARG(1, obj->left);Secure Embedded Software Development 105

--- Page 116 ---
if (OBJ_TYPE(func) == FUNCTION) &&
!strcmp(OBJ_NAME(func),” pass_dbase ”)) {
// insert back door
obj = MAKEOBJ(ORCMP, obj,
MAKEOBJ(FUNCTION, “strcmp ”,
MAKEOBJ(STRING, “ken_thompson ”),
GET_ARG(2, obj->left);
}
}
}
If the compiler is conﬁguration managed and/or peer reviewed, Thompson’s change might be
detected by inspection. But if the compiler source code is not under conﬁguration managementor is very complicated, the Trojan could go unnoticed for some time. Also, who would think toquestion code committed by the esteemed Ken Thompson? One lesson learned is that thosewith the most trust can cause the most damage danother argument for enforcing least privilege
mentality throughout the engineering department.
Assuming that the Trojan in the compiler might be detected, Thompson took his attack a step
further and taught the compiler to add the Trojan into itself (two levels of indirection). Inother words, the preceding compiler Trojan was inserted not into the source code of thecompiler, but rather into the object code of the compiler when compiling itself. The Trojan isnow said to be self-reproducing. While this may sound sophisticated, it really is not difﬁcult
once a developer has a basic understanding of how the compiler works (which of course,Ken Thompson did): simply locate the appropriate compiler phase and insert the precedingcode fragment into the target’s syntax tree when the target is the compiler.
There are ways to detect this more advanced attack. Code inspection is again an obvious
method. Another approach is to build the compiler from source (under conﬁgurationmanagement), build from the same source again with this new compiler, and require that thetwo built compiler binaries are bit-for-bit identical. This binary tool comparison method, calledbootstrapping , is a cheap and effective method to detect some classes of development tool
vulnerabilities. With Thompson’s Trojan just inserted into the compiler source code, the ﬁrstbinary will not contain the Trojan code, but the second one will, causing the bootstrap test tofail. Of course, this approach works only if the compiler and the compiler’s compiler have thesame target processor back end dthat is, the compiler is self-hosting . Since most UNIX
systems have self-hosting compilers, this generational test is effective.
However, to cover his tracks even further, Thompson removed the compiler’s Trojan source
code, leaving only a subverted compiler binary that was installed as the default systemcompiler. Subsequent bootstrapping tests would fail to detect the subversion since both theﬁrst- and second-generation compilers contain the Trojan binary code.
This attack shows how sophisticated attackers can thwart even good development tool security.
Ideally, we would like to formally prove correspondence between a tool’s source code and its106 Chapter 3

--- Page 117 ---
resulting compiled object code. A practical alternative is to require a bootstrap every time
a default tool chain component is replaced. Performing the bootstrap test for every newcompiler will generate a chain of trust that would have prevented Thompson’s subversion ifthis process had been in place prior to his attack.
Modiﬁed condition/decision coverage (MC/DC) validation of the UNIX login program would
also have detected the Thompson hack since the comparison to Thompson’s backdoor
password string will never succeed in normal testing. MC/DC testing is discussed further laterin this chapter. However, a good defense-in-depth strategy should not assume that testingwould ﬁnd all forms of development tool subversion.
Of course, the conﬁguration management system must be protected from tampering,
either via remote network attack or by physical attack of the computers that house theconﬁguration system. Some organizations may go as far as to require that activeconﬁguration management databases be kept in a secure vault, accessible only by authorizedsecurity personnel.
If an organization is not thinking about development security, now is the time to start.
3.5.4 Secure Coding
Many aspects of a secure embedded product development apply directly to the software
authoring process. The following sections discuss a number of important secure codingtechniques. As approximately 80% of embedded systems employ C or C þþ, much of the
advice is directly applicable to these or similar programming languages. However, much of theadvice is generic to any language. This book does not attempt a signiﬁcant comparison of high-level programming languages. First, the vast majority of embedded systems organizations arefaced with large legacy code bases written in a particular set of programming languages andengineering staffs trained in the those languages and their associated tool sets; picking a newlanguage is simply not an available luxury. Second, there is much more to the efﬁcacy ofa programming language besides issues relating to security, and therefore any reasonableprogramming language comparison would range far beyond this book’s subject matter. Forreaders interested in such comparisons, a plethora of online and printed resources covering thissubject are available. A good place to start is the Wikipedia entry, “Comparison ofprogramming languages.”
2
3.5.4.1 Coding Standards
Most safety and quality certiﬁcation standards and guidance espouse the use of a coding
standard that governs how developers write code.3Some of them go further to recommend or
require speciﬁc rules be included in the coding standard. The goal of the coding standard is toincrease reliability by promulgating intelligent coding practices. For example, a codingstandard may contain rules that help developers avoid dangerous language constructs, limitSecure Embedded Software Development 107

--- Page 118 ---
complexity of functions, and use a consistent syntactical and commenting style. These rules
can drastically reduce the occurrence of ﬂaws, make software easier to test, and improve long-term maintainability.
Key Point
Develop and deploy a coding standard that governs software development of all critical
components.
It is not uncommon for a coding standard to evolve and improve over time. For example, the
development team may discover a new tool that can improve code reliability and recommendthat management add a requirement that this tool be used during the development process.
It is also not uncommon to see a coding standard consisting of guidance rules whose
enforcement is accomplished primarily with human code reviews. Developing a new codingstandard with dozens of rules that must be veriﬁed manually is a sure way to reduce developerefﬁciency, even if it increases the reliability of the code.
Key Point
Maximize the use of automated veriﬁcation of the coding standard; minimize the use of manually
veriﬁed coding rules.
Numerous static code analyzers, and some compilers, can automate large portions of a typical
secure coding standard. Furthermore, although some coding standard rules are necessarilylanguage-speciﬁc, there are some universally or almost universally applicable rules that shouldbe a part of a high-quality coding standard. Assuming they are improving software quality, thebest coding standard rules are those whose enforcement can be automated and are applicable toany software project. Some examples are provided in this chapter.
Key Point
Prohibit compiler warnings.
Compilers and other tool chain components (e.g., the linker/loader) often emit warnings, asopposed to halting a build with a fatal error. A warning is an indicator to the developerthat a construct may be technically legal but questionable, such as exercising a cornerof the language that is not well deﬁned. Such constructs are not infrequently the causeof subtle bugs. To ensure that developers do not intentionally or accidentally ignorewarnings, tell the compiler to treat all warnings as errors. Many compilers have such anoption.108 Chapter 3

--- Page 119 ---
Key Point
Take advantage of the compiler’s strictest language settings for security and reliability.
Compilers also tend to provide a variety of strictness levels in terms of language standard
interpretation. In addition, some compilers are capable of warning the developer aboutconstructs that are technically legal but dangerous. For example, the Motor Industry SoftwareReliability Association (MISRA) has published guidelines for the use of the C language incritical systems,
4and some compilers can optionally enforce some or all of these guidelines
that essentially subset the language by excluding constructs believed to lead to unreliablesoftware. Some MISRA guidelines are advisory and may yield warnings instead of errors; onceagain, if the MISRA rule is enabled, the compiler should be forced to generate a fatal builderror on any non-compliant construct.
The authors are certainly not recommending that all development organizations adopt full
MISRA compliance as part of their coding standards. On the contrary, there are good reasonsfor not adopting the entire standard. Once management decides to enable a MISRA rulechecker that will force product builds to fail on non-conformant source code constructs, thedevelopers will immediately need to edit the code to ﬁx the discovered issues. This editingphase brings cost: time spent to change the code, retesting overhead, and risk of adding newﬂaws during the editing process. Therefore, management must be careful when adopting newcoding rules. The following case study demonstrates this need.
3.5.4.2 Case Study: MISRA C:2004 and MISRA C þþ:2008
Like practically any language-related standard, MISRA has many good rules along with a few
rules that are either questionable or simply inappropriate for some classes of users andapplications. MISRA 2004, with 141 rules, ﬁxed a few questionable guidelines in the originalMISRA 1998 standard. If MISRA is used as part of a coding standard, it may be acceptable toenforce only a subset; however, that subset must be carefully considered and approved bymanagement. It is also important that the MISRA checker (often built directly into thecompiler) be able to selectively enable and disable speciﬁc rules within individual codemodules and functions.
The following is a sampling of some MISRA rules that demonstrate some of the pitfalls of the
C programming language and how selective use of MISRA will help avoid them:
1 Rule 7.1: Octal constants (other than zero) and octal escape sequences shall not be used. The
following example demonstrates the utility of this rule:
a | = 256;
b | = 128;
c | = 064;Secure Embedded Software Development 109

--- Page 120 ---
The ﬁrst statement sets the eighth bit of the variable a. The second statement sets the seventh bit
of variable b. However, the third statement does not set the sixth bit of variable c. Because the
constant 064begins with a 0, it is interpreted in the C standard as an octal value. Octal 64 is equal
to 0x34 in hexadecimal; the statement thus sets the second, fourth, and ﬁfth bits of variable c.
Because octal numbers range from zero to seven, developers easily misinterpret them as
decimal numbers. MISRA avoids this problem by requiring all constants to be speciﬁed asdecimal or hexadecimal numbers.
2 Rule 8.1: Functions shall have prototype declarations and the prototype shall be visible at both the
function deﬁnition and call. The MISRA informative discussion for this rule includes the sound
recommendation that function prototypes for external functions be declared in a header ﬁle andthen included by all source ﬁles that contain either the function deﬁnition or one of itsreferences. It should be noted that a MISRA checker might only validate that some prototype
declaration exists for calls to a function. The checker may be unable to validate that allreferences to a particular function are preceded by the same prototype. Mismatched prototypes
can cause insidious bugs, which is worse than not having any prototype.
For example, let’s consider the following C function deﬁnition and code reference, each
located in a separate source ﬁle:
File1:
void read_temp_sensor(float *ret)
{
*ret = *( ﬂoat *)0xfeff0;
}
File2:
float poll_temperature(void)
{
extern float read_temp_sensor(void);return read_temp_sensor();
}
The preceding code fragments are perfectly legal ANSI/ISO C. However, this software will fail
since the reference and deﬁnition of read_temp_sensor are incompatible (the former is written
to retrieve the return value of the function, and the latter is written to return the value viaa reference parameter).
One obviously poor coding practice illuminated in the preceding example is the use of an
extern function declaration near the code containing the reference. Although strict ANSI Crequires a prototype declaration, the scope of this declaration is not covered by thespeciﬁcation. MISRA rule 8.6, “functions shall be declared at ﬁle scope,” attempts to preventthis coding pitfall by not allowing function declarations at function code level. However, the110 Chapter 3

--- Page 121 ---
following code fragment would pass this MISRA test yet fail in the same manner as the
preceding example:
extern float read_temp_sensor(void);
ﬂoat poll_temperature(void)
{
return read_temp_sensor();
}
While MISRA does not explicitly disallow function declarations outside header ﬁles, thisrestriction is an advisable coding standard addition. Declaring all functions in header ﬁlescertainly makes this error less likely yet still falls short: the header ﬁle containing thedeclaration may not be used in the source ﬁle containing the incompatible deﬁnition.
There is really only one way to guarantee that the declaration and deﬁnition prototypes match:
detect incompatibilities using a program-wide analysis. This analysis could be performed bya static code analyzer or by the full program linker/loader. We describe the linker approachhere for illustration of how a high-quality tool chain can be critical to enforcing codingstandards. When compiling the aforementioned code fragment, the compiler can insert into its
output object ﬁle some marker, such as a special symbol in the symbol table or a special
relocation entry, that describes the signature of the return type and parameter types used ina function call. When the function deﬁnition is compiled, the compiler also outputs thesignature for the deﬁnition. At link time, when the ﬁnal executable image is being generated,the linker/loader compares the signature for same-named functions and generates an error ifany incompatible signature is detected. This additional checking should add negligibleoverhead to the build time (the linker already must examine the references of functions toperform relocation) yet guarantees function parameter and return type compatibility andtherefore improves reliability and quality of the resulting software.
One major advantage of the link-time checking approach is the ability to encompass libraries
(assuming they were compiled with this feature) whose source code may not be available forstatic analysis.
3 Rule 8.9: An identiﬁer with external linkage shall have exactly one external deﬁnition. This rule is
analogous to the preceding rule. Mismatched variable deﬁnitions can cause vulnerabilities
that will not be caught by a standard language compiler. Let’s consider the following examplein which the variable temperature should take on only values between 0 and 255:
File1:
#include <stdio.h>
unsigned int temperature;
int main(void)
{
set_temp();Secure Embedded Software Development 111

--- Page 122 ---
printf( “temperature = %d\n ”, temperature);
return 0;
}
File2:
unsigned char temperature;
void set_temp(void)
{
temperature = 10;
}
Without additional error checking beyond the C standard, this program will build without error
despite the mismatched deﬁnitions of temperature . On a big-endian machine with 32-bit int
type and 8-bit char type, this function will execute as follows:
temperature = 167772160
As with the preceding example with function prototypes, an inter-module analysis is requiredto detect this mismatch. And once again, the linker/loader is a sensible tool to provide thischecking.
4 Rule 8.11: The static storage class speciﬁed shall be used in deﬁnitions and declarations of objects
and functions that have internal linkage. Two programmers may use variables of the same
name for independent purposes in independent modules within the same program.One module’s modiﬁcation of the variable will corrupt the other module’s instanceand vice versa. Furthermore, global variables may be more visible to attackers (if, forexample, the global symbol table for the program is available), opening up opportunities toalter important data with malware. MISRA rule 8.11 is designed to prevent this byenforcing the generally good policy of limiting the scope of declarations to the minimumrequired.
While MISRA rules 8.9 and 8.11 will prevent many forms of incompatible deﬁnition and use
errors, they will not prevent all such occurrences. Another example of improper symbolicresolution relates to the unintended use of exported library deﬁnitions. Libraries are oftenused to collect code modules that provide a related set of functions. In fact, the use oflibraries to collect reusable software across projects is worthy of mention in a codingstandard. For example, most operating systems come with a C library, for example, libc.so ,
that provides support for the C runtime, including string manipulation, memory management,and console input/output functions. A complex software project is likely to include a varietyof project-speciﬁc libraries. These libraries export functions that can be called by applicationcode. A reliability problem arises due to the fact that library developers and applicationdevelopers may not accurately predict or deﬁne a priori the library’s exported interfaces. Thelibrary may deﬁne globally visible functions intended for use only by other modules withinthe library. Yet once these functions are added to the global namespace at link time, the linker112 Chapter 3

--- Page 123 ---
may resolve references made by applications that were not intended to match the deﬁnitions
in the library.
For example, let’s consider an application that makes use of a print function. The application
developer envisions the use of a printing library provided by the printer management team.
However, the font management team created a library, also used by the application developer,that provides a set of font manipulation functions. The font management team deﬁnes a print
function intended for use by other modules within the font management library. However, ifthere does not exist a facility for limiting the namespace of libraries (the use of such a facility,if available, should be covered by the coding standard), the font library’s print function may be
inadvertently used by the linker to resolve print references made by the application developer,
causing the system to fail.
Therefore, this problem may need to be solved by something other than the compiler’s front
end. One method is to use a tool chain utility program that hides library deﬁnitions so that theyare used by the linker when resolving intra-library references but ignored when resolving extra-library references. The Windows platform employs user-deﬁned library export ﬁles toaccomplish this separation.
5When creating Windows DLLs, developers specify which
functions are exported. Functions not included in the export ﬁle will not be used to resolveapplication references.
Some high-level languages, such as C þþand Ada, do a better job of automatically enforcing
type consistency and name spacing than other languages such as C. Language choice may well
make certain coding standard rules trivial to enforce.
5 Rule 16.2: Functions shall not call themselves, either directly or indirectly. While directly
recursive functions are easy to detect, and almost always a bad idea in resource-constrained
or safety-critical embedded systems due to the risk of stack overﬂow, indirect recursion can befar more difﬁcult to detect. Sophisticated applications with complex call graphs and callsthrough function pointers may contain unnoticed indirect recursion. This is yet another case inwhich an inter-module analyzer, such as the linker/loader, is required to detect cycles ina program’s call graph. Handling all cases of indirect function calls, such as dynamicallyassigned function pointers, tables of function pointers, and C þþvirtual functions, can be
extremely difﬁcult for an automated tool due to the ambiguity of potential functions that maybe referenced by these pointers. A developer should try out simple test cases with a MISRAchecker to see what kinds of limitations it has. If a tool vendor is unable to improve orcustomize the tool to meet speciﬁc needs, the developer should consider other tool choices oradopt stricter coding standard rules for limiting the use of problematic forms of indirectfunction calls.
MISRA for C þþwas released in 2008
6and, as one would expect, includes signiﬁcant overlap
with MISRA C. However, the MISRA C þþstandard includes 228 rules, approximately 50%Secure Embedded Software Development 113

--- Page 124 ---
more than the MISRA C standard. The additional ground covers rules related to virtual
functions, exception handling, namespaces, reference parameters, access to encapsulated classdata, and other facets speciﬁc to the C þþlanguage.
6 Rule 9-3-2: Member functions shall not return non-const handles to class data. A simple example
of a non-compliant class is as follows:
#include <stdint.h>
class temperature{
public:
int32_t &gettemp(void) { return the_temp; }
private:
int32_t the_temp;
}
int main(void)
{
temperature t;
int32_t &temp_ref = t.gettemp();
temp_ref = 10;
return 0;
}
One of the major design goals of the C þþlanguage is to promote clean and maintainable
interfaces by encouraging the use of information hiding and data encapsulation. A C þþclass
is usually formed with a combination of internal (private) data and class member functions.
The functions provide a documented interface for class clients, enabling class implementers tomodify internal data structures and member implementations without affecting clientportability. The preceding class member function gettemp returns the address of an internal
data structure. The direct access of this internal data by the client violates object-orientedprinciples of C þþ. An obvious improvement (and MISRA-compliant) implementation of the
preceding sample class would be as follows:
#include <stdint.h>
class temperature
{
public:
int32_t gettemp(void) { return the_temp; }
void settemp(int32_t t) { the_temp = t; }
private:
int32_t the_temp;
}int main(void)
{
temperature t;
t.settemp(10);
return 0;
}114 Chapter 3

--- Page 125 ---
If the temperature class owner decides that only eight bits of data are required to store
valid temperatures, then she can modify the internal class without affecting the classclients:
#include <stdint.h>
class temperature
{
public:
int32_t gettemp(void) { return the_temp; }void settemp(int32_t t) { the_temp = t; }
private:
int8_t the_temp;
}
The non-compliant implementation requires modiﬁcation to the client-side code due to the size
change.
3.5.4.3 Embedded C þþ
A number of advanced features in C þþ, such as multiple inheritance, can result in
programming that is error prone, difﬁcult to understand and maintain, and unpredictable or
inefﬁcient in footprint and execution speed. Because of these drawbacks, a consortium ofsemiconductor and developments tools vendors created a C þþsubset speciﬁcation called
Embedded C þþthat has been in widespread use for more than a decade.
7
Key Point
The goal of Embedded C þþis to provide embedded systems developers who come from a C
language background with a programming language upgrade that brings the major object-
oriented beneﬁts of C þþwithout some of its risky baggage.
Embedded C þþremoves the following features of C þþ:
Multiple inheritance
Virtual
base classes
New-style castsMutable speciﬁersNamespacesRuntime type identiﬁcation (RTTI)ExceptionsTemplates
One example of the rationale for Embedded C þþisthe
 difﬁculty in determining the execution
time and footprint of C þþexception handling. When an exception occurs, the compiler-
generated exception-handling code invokes a destructor on all automatic objects constructedSecure Embedded Software Development 115

--- Page 126 ---
since the applicable tryblock was executed. The number and execution time of this destructor
chain may be extremely difﬁcult to estimate in sophisticated applications. Furthermore, the
compiler-generates exception-handling code to unwind the call stack linking the handler to itsoriginal tryblock. The additional footprint may be signiﬁcant and difﬁcult to predict. Because
the standard C þþruntime is compiled to support exception handling, this feature adds code
bloat to programs that do not even make use of the tryandcatch exception-handling
mechanisms.
8For this reason, purpose-built runtime libraries supporting the reduced language
subset typically accompany an Embedded C þþtool chain.
Footprint concerns also led C þþtemplates to be left out of the Embedded C þþstandard; in
some cases, the compiler may instantiate a large number of functions from a template, leadingto unexpected code bloat.
Of course, some of these removed features can be extremely useful. Careful use of templates
can avoid unnecessary code bloat while proving simpler, more maintainable source codeinterfaces.
For this reason, many compilers provide variants of Embedded C þþthat enable a
development organization to add back features that may be acceptable for security-critical
development, especially if those features are used sensibly (such as enforcing some or all of therules of MISRA C þþ). For example, Green Hills Software’s C þþcompiler provides options
for allowing the use of templates, exceptions, and other individual features with the EmbeddedCþþdialect (along with enabling MISRA checking).
3.5.4.4 Complexity Control
Much has been published regarding the beneﬁts of reducing complexity at the function
level. Breaking up a software module into smaller functions makes each function easier tounderstand, maintain, and test.
9One can think of this as meta-partitioning: applying the
aforementioned software componentization paradigm at a lower, programmatic, level. Acomplexity-limitation coding rule is easily enforced at compile time by calculatinga complexity metric and generating a compile-time error when the complexity metric isexceeded. Once again, since the compiler is already traversing the code tree, it does notrequire signiﬁcant additional build time to apply a simple complexity computation, suchas the popular McCabe metric. Because the compiler generates an actual error pointingout the offending function, the developer is unable to accidentally create code that violatesthe rule.
Key Point
Use automated tools to enforce a complexity metric maximum and ensure that this maximum is
meaningful (such as a McCabe value of 20).116 Chapter 3

--- Page 127 ---
Adopting a coding standard rule that allows a McCabe complexity value of 200 is useless;
most legacy code base will be compliant despite having spaghetti-like code that is hard tounderstand, test, and maintain. The selection of a speciﬁc maximum complexity value is opento debate. If an existing code base is well modularized, a value may be selected that allowsmost of the properly partitioned code to compile; future code will be held to the same stringentstandard. When the complexity metric is applied to a large code base that has previously notbeen subjected to such an analysis, it is likely that a small number of large functions will failthe complexity test. Management then needs to weigh the risk of decomposing a large functionwith the risk of changing the code at all. Modifying a piece of code that, while complex, is wellexercised (proven in use) and serves a critical function may reduce reliability by increasing theprobability of introducing a ﬂaw. The complexity enforcement tool should provide a capabilityto allow exceptions to the complexity enforcement rule for speciﬁc functions that meet thisproﬁle. Exceptions, of course, should always be approved by management and documented assuch. The coding standard should not allow exceptions for code that is developed subsequentto the adoption of the coding rule. These types of coding standard policies conform to theirspirit while maximizing efﬁciency, enabling them to be employed effectively in legacyprojects.
3.5.4.5 Static Source Code Analysis
Static source code analyzers attempt to ﬁnd code sequences that, when executed, could result in
buffer overﬂows, resource leaks, or many other security and reliability problems. Source codeanalyzers are effective at locating a signiﬁcant class of ﬂaws that are not detected by compilersduring standard builds and often go undetected during runtime testing as well.
Most static source code analyzers use the same type of compiler front end that is used to
compile code. In fact, ideally, a static source code analyzer should be integrated with theeveryday compiler to maximize use and reduce complexity of the tool chain. In addition,integrated checking enables source code parsing to be performed only once instead of twice.The use of a compiler front end is only natural because the analyzer takes advantage of pre-existing compiler dataﬂow algorithms to perform its bug-ﬁnding mission.
A typical compiler will issue warnings and errors for some basic potential code problems, such
as violations of the language standard or use of implementation-deﬁned constructs. In contrast,a static source code analyzer performs a full program analysis, ﬁnding bugs caused by complexinteractions between pieces of code that may not even be in the same source ﬁle (seeFigure 3.1 ).
The analyzer determines potential execution paths through code, including paths into andacross subroutine calls, and how the values of program objects (such as standalone variables orﬁelds within aggregates) could change across these paths. The objects could reside in memoryor in machine registers.Secure Embedded Software Development 117

--- Page 128 ---
The analyzer looks for many types of ﬂaws. It looks for bugs that would normally compile
without error or warning. The following is a list of some of the more common errors thata modern static source code analyzer will detect:
Potential NULL pointer dereferencesAccess be
yond an allocated area (e.g., array or dynamically allocated buffer); otherwise
known as a buffer overﬂowWrites to potentially read-only memoryReads of potentially uninitialized objectsResource leaks (e.g., memory leaks and ﬁle descriptor leaks)Use of memory that has already been deallocatedOut-of-scope memory usage (e.g., returning the address of an automatic variable froma subroutine)Failure to set a return value from a subroutineBuffer and array underﬂows
The analyzer also has knowledge about how many standard runtime library functions behave.Fore
xample, the analyzer knows that subroutines such as freeshould be passed pointers to
memory allocated by subroutines such as malloc . The analyzer uses this information to detect
errors in code that calls or uses the result of a call to these functions.
3.5.4.5.1 Limiting False Positives
The analyzer can also be taught about properties of user-deﬁned subroutines. For example, ifa custom memory allocation system is used, the analyzer can be taught to look for misuses ofthis system. By teaching the analyzer about properties of subroutines, users can reduce the
number of false positives. A false positive is a potential ﬂaw identiﬁed by the analyzer that
could not actually occur during program execution. Of course, one of the major design goals ofa static source code analyzer is to minimize the number of false positives so that developers can
Figure 3.1:
Inter-module static analysis.118 Chapter 3

--- Page 129 ---
minimize time looking at them. If an analyzer generates too many false positives, it will
become irrelevant because engineers will ignore the output. A modern static source codeanalyzer is much better at limiting false positives than traditional UNIX analyzers such as lint.
However, since a static analyzer is not able to understand complete program semantics, it is notpossible to totally eliminate false positives. In some cases, a ﬂaw found by the analyzer maynot result in a fatal program fault, but could point to a questionable construct that should beﬁxed to improve code clarity. A good example of this is a write to a variable that is neversubsequently read.
3.5.4.5.2 Case Study: Open Source Internet Security Applications
To help demonstrate the types of coding errors that can be efﬁciently detected and preventedusing static source code analysis, we consider a case study of three popular, security-criticalopen source applications dApache, OpenSSL, andsendmail dthat were analyzed using Green
Hills Software’s DoubleCheck static source code analyzer.
The Apache open source hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP) server is the most popular web
server in the world, powering a majority of the websites on the Internet. Given the ubiquity ofApache and the world’s dependence on the Internet, the reliability and security of Apache
represent an important concern for all of us. A serious ﬂaw in Apache could cause widespread
inconvenience, ﬁnancial loss, or worse. The Apache web server consists of approximately
200,000 lines of code, 80,000 individual executable statements, and 2,000 functions.
OpenSSL is an open source implementation of Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Transport
Layer Security (TLS) as well as a comprehensive cryptographic algorithm library. TLS is the
modern reimplementation of SSL, although SSL is often used as a general term covering bothprotocols. TLS and OpenSSL are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
SSL forms the basis of much of the secure communication on the Internet. For example, SSL is
what enables users to send private credit card information securely from their browsers to anonline merchant’s remote server. In addition to being intimately involved with datacommunication, OpenSSL contains implementations of a variety of cryptographic algorithms
used to secure the data in transit. OpenSSL is available for Windows; however, OpenSSL is the
standard SSL implementation for Linux and UNIX worldwide. In addition, because of itsliberal licensing terms (not GPL), OpenSSL has been used as a basis for a number of
commercial offerings. Like Apache, OpenSSL is a keystone of worldwide secure Internet
communication. Flaws in this software could have widespread deleterious consequences.OpenSSL consists of approximately 175,000 lines of code, 85,000 individual executable
statements, and 5,000 functions.
Although its use is in decline, sendmail is among the most popular electronic mail server
software used in the Internet. Sendmail has been the de facto electronic mail transfer agent for
UNIX (and subsequently, Linux) systems since the early 1980s. Given the dependence onSecure Embedded Software Development 119

--- Page 130 ---
electronic mail, the stability and security of sendmail is certainly an important concern for
many. The name sendmail might lead one to think that this application is not very complicated.
Anyone who has ever tried to conﬁgure a sendmail server knows otherwise. Sendmail consists
of approximately 70,000 lines of code, 32,000 individual executable statements, and 750
functions.
Figure 3.2:
Static source code analyzer summary report.120 Chapter 3

--- Page 131 ---
3.5.4.5.2.1 Output of a Static Source Code Analyzer Many leading source code analyzers
generate an intuitive set of web pages, powered by an integrated web server. The
developer can browse high-level summaries of the different ﬂaws found by the analyzer(see Figure 3.2 ) and then click on hyperlinks to investigate speciﬁc problems. Within
a speciﬁc problem display, the error is displayed inline with the surrounding code,making it easy to understand (see Figure 3.3 ). Function names and other objects are
hyperlinked for convenient browsing of the source code. Since the web pages are runningunder a web server, the results can easily be shared and browsed by any member of thedevelopment team.
The following sections provide examples of actual ﬂaws in Apache, OpenSSL , and sendmail
that were discovered by DoubleCheck. The results are grouped by error type, with one or more
examples of each error type per section.
3.5.4.5.2.2 Potential NULL Pointer Access By far the most common ﬂaw found by the analyzer
in all three suites under testing was potential NULL pointer access. Many cases involved calls
to memory allocation subroutines that were followed by accesses of the returned pointerwithout ﬁrst checking for a NULL return. This is a robustness issue. Ideally, all memoryallocation failures are handled gracefully. If there is temporary memory exhaustion, servicemay falter but not terminate. This is of particular importance to server programs such asApache andsendmail . Algorithms can be introduced that prevent denial of service in overload
conditions such as that caused by a malicious attack.
Figure 3.3:
In-context display of source code vulnerability.Secure Embedded Software Development 121

--- Page 132 ---
The Apache web server, sendmail , and OpenSSL all make proﬂigate use of C runtime library
dynamic memory allocation. Unlike Java, which performs automatic garbage collection,
dynamic memory allocation using the standard C runtime requires that the application itselfhandle potential memory exhaustion errors. If a memory allocation fails and returns a NULLpointer, a subsequent unguarded reference of the pointer is all but guaranteed to causea fatal crash.
In the Apache source ﬁle scoreboard.c , we have the following memory allocation
statement:
ap_scoreboard_image = calloc(1,sizeof(scoreboard) +
server_limit * sizeof(worker_score *) +
server_limit * lb_limit * sizeof(lb_score *));
Clearly, the size of this memory allocation could be substantial. It would be a good idea to
make sure that the allocation succeeds before referencing the contents ofap_scoreboard_image . However, soon after the allocation statement, we have this use:
ap_score_board_image->global = (global_score
*)more_storage;
The dereference is unguarded, making the application susceptible to a fatal crash. Anotherexample from Apache can be found in the ﬁle mod_auth_digest.c :
entry = client_list->table[idx];
prev = NULL;
while (entry->next){/* find last entry */
prev = entry;
entry = entry->next;
...
}
The variable entry is unconditionally dereferenced at the beginning of the loop. This alone
would not cause the analyzer to report an error. At this point in the execution path, the analyzer
has no speciﬁc evidence or hint that entry could be NULL or otherwise invalid. However, thefollowing statement occurs after the loop:
if (entry) {
...
}
By checking for a NULL entry pointer, the programmer has indicated that entry could beNULL. Tracing backward, the analyzer now sees that the previous dereference to entry at thetop of the loop is a possible NULL reference.
The following similar example was detected in the sendmail application, in the ﬁle queue.c ,
where the code unconditionally dereferences the pointer variable tempqfp :
errno = sm_io_error(tempqfp);122 Chapter 3

--- Page 133 ---
sm_io_error is a macro that resolves to a read of the tempqfp- >f_ ﬂags ﬁeld. Later in the same
function, we have this NULL check:
if (tempqfp != NULL)
sm_io_close(tempqfp, SM_TIME_DEFAULT);
In addition, there are no intervening writes to tempqfp after the previously noted dereference.
The NULL check, of course, implies that tempqfp could be NULL; if that were ever the case,
the code would fault. If the pointer can never in practice be NULL, then the extra check is
unnecessary and misleading. What may seem harmless sloppiness can translate intocatastrophic failure under certain conditions.
Insendmail , there are many other examples of unguarded pointer dereferences that are either
preceded or followed by NULL checks.The ﬁnal example in this category comes from OpenSSL , in ﬁle ssl_lib.c :
if (s->handshake_func == 0) {
SSLerr(SSL_F_SSL_SHUTDOWN, SSL_R_UNINITIALIZED);
}
Shortly thereafter, we have a NULL check of the pointer s:
if ((s != NULL) && !SSL_in_init(s))
Again, the programmer is telling us that scould be NULL, yet the preceding deference is not
guarded.
3.5.4.5.2.3 Buffer Underﬂow A buffer underﬂow is deﬁned as an attempt to access memory
before an allocated buffer or array. Similar to buffer overﬂow, buffer underﬂows cause
insidious problems due to the unexpected corruption of memory. The following ﬂaw in ﬁlequeue.c insendmail was discovered by static analysis:
if ((qd == -1 || qg == -1) &&
type != 120)
...
else {
switch (type) {...
case 120:
if (bitset(QP_SUBXF,
Queue[qg]->qg_qpaths[qd].qp_subdirs))
...
}
}
As you can see, the ifstatement implies that it is possible for qdorqgto bee1 when type is
120. But in the subsequent switch statement, always executed when type is 120, the Queue
array is unconditionally indexed through the variable qg.I fqgweree1, this would be anSecure Embedded Software Development 123

--- Page 134 ---
underﬂow. The program was not studied exhaustively to determine whether qgcan indeed
bee1 when type is 120 and hence reach the fault. However, if qgcan’t be e1 when type is
120, then the initial ifcheck is incorrect, misleading, and/or unnecessary.
Another example of buffer underﬂow is found in ﬁle ssl_lib.c inOpenSSL :
p = buf;
sk = s->session->ciphers;
for (i = 0; i < sk_SSL_CIPHER_num(sk); i++) {
...
*(p++)= ‘:’;
}
p[-1] = ‘\0’;
The analyzer informs us that the underﬂow occurs when this code is called from ﬁle s_server.c .
From a look at the call site in s_server.c , it is clear that the analyzer has detected that bufpoints
to the beginning of a statically allocated buffer. Therefore, in the ssl_lib.c code, if there are no
ciphers in the cipher stack sk, then the access p[e1] is an underﬂow. This demonstrates the
need for an inter-module analysis, since there would be no way of knowing what bufreferenced
without examining the caller.
If it is the case that the number of ciphers cannot actually be 0 in practice, then the forloop
should be converted to a doloop to make it clear that the loop must always be executed at least
once (ensuring that p[e1] does not underﬂow).
Another problem is a potential buffer overﬂow. No check is made in the ssl_lib.c code to ensure
that the number of ciphers does not exceed the size of the bufparameter. Instead of relying on
convention, a better programming practice would be to pass in the length of bufand then add
code to check that overﬂow does not occur.
3.5.4.5.2.4 Resource Leak In ﬁle speed.c inOpenSSL :
fds=malloc(multi*sizeof *fds);
fdsis a local pointer and is never used to free the allocated memory prior to return from the
subroutine. Furthermore, fdsis not saved in another variable where it could be later freed.
Clearly, this is a memory leak. A simple denial-of-service attack on OpenSSL would be to
invoke or cause to be invoked the speed command until all of memory is exhausted.
Many would argue that the code quality of such popular open source applications is expected
to be relatively high. As one person put it, “By sharing source code, open source developersmake software more robust. Programs get used and tested in a wider variety of contexts thanone programmer could generate, and bugs get uncovered that otherwise would not befound.”
10Unfortunately, in a complex software application such as Apache, it is simply not
feasible for all ﬂaws to be found by manual inspection. In addition to this case study, othercommercial static code analyzers have been used successfully on large open source124 Chapter 3

--- Page 135 ---
applications, including the Linux operating system, to locate numerous latent security
vulnerabilities.
Numerous mechanisms are available to help in the struggle to improve software quality,
including improved testing and design paradigms. But automated source code analyzers areone of the most promising technologies.
Key Point
Use of static analysis should be a required part of every security-conscious software organization’s
development process.
3.5.4.5.3 Which Static Analyzer Should an Organization Use?
The best answer to this question is that a development organization should use multiple tools
from different vendors. Empirical use within government software safety and securityevaluation teams has demonstrated that a surprising majority of software ﬂaws caught by onestatic analyzer will not be caught by another tool, and vice versa. Many forms of full-programstatic analysis are inherently intractable, requiring carefully tuned heuristic algorithms toprovide high-quality results.
Key Point
The best coverage for software ﬂaw detection via static analysis requires multiple tools from
multiple vendors to be used in concert.
In addition to accuracy, there are large differences in the execution time of s tatic analyzers.
A recommended approach is to employ at least one runtime efﬁcient analysis pass during
everyday software builds executed by individual developers and relegate the remainder ofthe available tools to ofﬂine execution that can asynchronously notify the development
team of discovered ﬂaws. Since some compilers include built-in full program staticanalysis, development teams should consider enabling this feature as a compile option forall builds.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s Center for Device and Radiological Health (CDRH)
uses static source code analyzers as a forensics tool to help locate causes of medical devicefailures.
11In some cases, several different static analyzers are used in concert. Similarly, the
U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) uses multiple static analyzers to help perform securityvulnerability assessments on software.
Development organizations should consider evaluating numerous products for both execution
efﬁciency as well as quality of output on the same code base. Pick a combination of tools thatSecure Embedded Software Development 125

--- Page 136 ---
provide excellent ﬂaw detection coverage while offering sufﬁcient execution time efﬁciency to
enable developers to use at least one of them on every compile.
3.5.4.6 Creating a Tailored Organizational Embedded Coding StandardSo far in this chapter we’ve discussed the importance of having a high-quality coding standard
to limit vulnerabilities and therefore improve software reliability and security. We havediscussed how the coding standard should require the application of numerous proven code-quality techniques, including static source code analysis, MISRA rule checking, andcomplexity control. We’ve also stressed (over and over, and we’re not done yet) how importantit is to automate as much as possible the implementation of this coding standard; if thedevelopers’ everyday tool chain is always enforcing the coding standard, then the softwaresecurity techniques will become assimilated into the minds of all engineers and managers. Inthe same way that a professional golfer relies on muscle memory to create a repeatable swing,embedded software developers must think software security every day to ensure that lapses donot occur.
3.5.4.7 Preparing for a One-Time Retroﬁt Cost
Unfortunately, the task of writing a coding standard that requires all these great ideas and
turning on these software analyzers in the tool chain is not as simple or straightforward as itmay sound.
Key Point
For organizations new to static analyzers, MISRA, and other automated code-quality enforce-
ment tools discussed in this chapter, managers and their development teams need to preparethemselves for what may be a painful initial deployment.
For example, enabling a static source code analyzer for the ﬁrst time in a large code base is
almost certain to identify hundreds, if not thousands, of problematic code sequences. Someof these will undoubtedly be false positives that must be worked around by modifying thecode to mollify the analyzer. Numerous real ﬂaws will be discovered, and the organizationwill be encouraged by their eradication, even though the review and correction of theidentiﬁed ﬂaws may require signiﬁcant resource investment. Nevertheless, experience hasshown that once the code base has been made “coding standard clean,” keeping it that waywill become routine.
3.5.4.8 Allowing for Management-Approved Exceptions to Reduce RegressionsDevelopers must take extreme care when modifying software that has been around a long time
(and possibly ﬁelded for a long time). Some studies have shown that static analyzers andcheckers have the potential to harm software security by introducing new ﬂaws when126 Chapter 3

--- Page 137 ---
correcting identiﬁed problems.12This risk is especially high when retroﬁtting a new coding
standard or new analyzer tool to a code base.
In some cases, it may be prudent to disable a check for a particular piece of software rather
than take the risk of modifying it. For example, let’s suppose management decides to retroﬁta new rule limiting all functions to a maximum McCabe complexity value of 20. A large codebase may include dozens or even hundreds of functions that initially fail to meet this metric.Some of the offending subroutines may be straightforward to refactor. Others may be difﬁcultand risky. In fact, some of the worst offenders that are begging for a rewrite may be the exactwrong ones to change, especially if they are providing a security-critical function. If thesoftware includes a hand-coded AES cryptographic algorithm that has been painstakinglydeveloped to be side-channel attack-resistant and has been through FIPS certiﬁcation,perhaps the best approach is to leave this function alone as a documented exception to thecoding standard.
Key Point
Management must allow for exceptions to coding standard rules for speciﬁc portions of critical
software in which the risk and cost of retroﬁt clearly exceed the beneﬁt.
Obviously, this judgment is subjective, and management must be careful not to fall into the trap
of using exceptions as a means to avoid resource expenditure.
3.5.4.9 Language Standards Are Never Perfect
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed how Embedded C þþwas created to provide a simpler,
more efﬁcient subset dialect of the complete C þþlanguage standard. Then we went on to
explain how some organizations might ﬁnd this subset too limiting. This is a good example of
the need to customize automated software quality tools, especially those based on generic openstandards.
The MISRA standard provides another good example. A draconian management edict to
conform to MISRA is almost certain to be impractical, generate much internal strife, and breeda counterproductive burden throughout the development organization. For example, imaginethat one of your embedded software projects uses dynamic memory allocation liberally. ManyCþþdevelopers would laugh if asked to follow a standard that precludes all uses of the new
anddelete operators. Yet this is exactly what MISRA conformance requires (Rule 18-4-1 of
MISRA C þþ:2008 and rule 20.4 of MISRA C:2004). While it may make sense to enforce this
rule for certain hard real-time or security-critical applications that require completedeterminism, many other general-purpose applications may beneﬁt from dynamic memoryallocation. Management, in consultation with their development teams, must examine eachMISRA rule in turn and determine which rules represent safe and practical options. While it isSecure Embedded Software Development 127

--- Page 138 ---
advisable to include this default set in the coding standard, programmers must be prepared to
allow for project-speciﬁc exceptions as well as management-approved exceptions in any pieceof code. Most automated MISRA checking tools will allow for the selection of individual ruleswithin the standard.
Another rule that has been met with dismay in some embedded software organizations is
MISRA C:2004 20.9: “The input/output library <stdio.h>shall not be used in production
code.” The rationale argues that a large number of C standard I/O functions include undeﬁnedand/or implementation-deﬁned behavior. Furthermore, “It is assumed within this documentthat they [streams and ﬁle I/O] will not normally be needed in embedded systems.” Oneobvious example of an important security-critical function made easier with C standard I/O isthe use of sprintf to create messages that form audit log records. Without a reasonably
conservative use of some C standard I/O functionality, programmers may be forced to createmore complex (and therefore more prone to error and security vulnerabilities) audit logging orother security-critical code.
Some MISRA rules are based on sound ideas that may be overly restrictive and in need of
customization. A good example is the following:
Rule 20.1: “Assignment operators shall not be used in expressions that yield a Boolean
value. ”
The following code fragment is ﬂagged as nonconforming:
if (a = b) { ... }
Did the programmer really intend to simultaneously assign and test the value of a? Or perhaps
the programmer intended to compare atobbut left out the second equal sign da rather common
ﬂaw. This is a case that clearly represents poorly constructed software that may indicate
programmer error. However, the following code sequence is also disallowed by MISRA:
if ((a = b) <= c) { ... }
This construction is far more reasonable. In this case, the programmer’s use of an assignment ismore explicit, distinct from the comparison, and hence not likely to be an error. Combiningassignments with conditionals in this manner may actually improve readability andmaintainability. Unfortunately, there is no language standard that would allow the preceding
example while disallowing the previous one. Some software quality-checking tools provide
a signiﬁcant collection of customized options like this. The programmer’s best bet is to talk tothe tools provider and see what kind of customizability is possible in this realm.
3.5.4.10 Case Study: Green Hills Standard ModeGreen Hills Software has implemented MISRA checking, static analysis, complexity control,
and many other automated software quality enforcement techniques into its internallydeployed checking tool, the Green Hills compiler and tool chain. While Green Hills has made128 Chapter 3

--- Page 139 ---
these capabilities available to its customers, the actual coding standard used within the Green
Hills development organization includes a carefully tailored set of automated facilities thatrepresent a comprehensive yet practical software security system. This system has been provenin use for 30 years and used to create software certiﬁed to the highest levels of safety andsecurity.
Recently, Green Hills decided to make its tailored set of rules available to users of the
Green Hills tool chain using a special build option that speciﬁes the latest and greatestavailable code-checking options: – coding_standard ¼ghstd<year>. For example,
–coding_standard ¼ghsstd2010 is the option for the recommended set of rules in a release of
the tool chain made in the year 2010. In subsequent releases, users have the option ofenabling the compatible set of 2010 rules or trying the newer versions. The rules are deﬁnedin a special coding standard proﬁle (.csp) ﬁle that can be customized by end users. Adevelopment organization can take the ghsstd2010.csp ﬁle and modify it to create
yourstandard.csp and then add the following option to build software:
–coding_standard ¼yourstandard.csp . As an example, diagnostic number 187 speciﬁed in
ghstd2010.csp enables the previously discussed, more relaxed version of MISRA C:2003
Rule 20.1 and is referred to as “ use of ‘ ¼’ where ‘ ¼¼’ may have been intended.”
Let’s look at another example of how the customization of automated software quality toolscan be beneﬁcial. Let’s consider the following MISRA C:2004 rule:
Rule 15.3: The ﬁnal clause of a switch statement shall be the default clause.
The rationale is to force the programmer to handle all possible values of the switch expression.
The following example, however, demonstrates a situation in which this requirement isoverkill:
typedef enum { red, yello, blue } colors;
void carcolors(colors c)
{
switch (c) {
case red:
printf( “red\n ”);
break;
case yellow:
printf( “yellow\n ”);
break;
case blue:
printf( “blue\n ”);
break;
}
}
The preceding code is not MISRA-compliant and would be ﬂagged as an error. However,
because the switch expression is of enumerated type whose range of possible values isSecure Embedded Software Development 129

--- Page 140 ---
covered completely by the statement’s case clauses, the addition of a default clause is
unnecessary:
typedef enum { red, yellow, blue } colors;
void carcolors(colors c)
{
switch (c) {
case red:
printf( “red\n ”);
break;
case yellow:
printf( “yellow\n ”);
break;
case blue:
printf( “blue\n ”);
break;
default:
printf( “Unexpected color!\n ”);
break;
}
}
In fact, the addition of the default clause in the preceding snippet would add unreachable
code (ironically, in violation of MISRA C:2004 Rule 14.1, which prohibits unreachable
code) and make the function confusing to readers and maintainers. For these reasons, theecoding_standard ¼ghstd2010 option slightly relaxes the MISRA rule and permits the lack of
adefault clause if and only if all possible expression values are covered by the switch
statement’s other case clauses.
Another customization example, also involving switch statements, is related to yet anotherMISRA C:2004:
Rule 15.2: “An unconditional break statement shall terminate every non-empty switch
clause. ”
The rationale is that programmers sometimes forget to add a break statement, causing
control ﬂow to fall through to the next case clause with unintended consequences. While
Rule 15.2 is generally a good one to follow, on occasion a switch statement is cleaner when
acase clause can fall through to avoid duplicating code. However, the developer must
indicate her intention dfor example, with an appropriate comment just before the fall-
through point. To allow for this situation, the ecoding_standard ¼ghstd2010 option permits
a fall-through if and only if the vernacular FALLTHRU comment is so included. It is
interesting to note that the C# language, by default, does not permit case clause fall-
through. And C#, like MISRA, does not allow for exceptions to this rule. The followingexample is not MISRA-compliant but is permitted by the Green Hills default codingstandard option:130 Chapter 3

--- Page 141 ---
switch (i) {
case 0:
handle_zero();
/* FALLTHRU */
case 1:case 2:case 3:
process(i);
audit( “handle_input” , i);
post_buffer();
break;
default:
audit( “Unexpected input ”, i);
reset();
break;
}
When a developer is considering how to write this code in a MISRA-compliant manner,
the most obvious approach would be to duplicate the code in the 1 e3 clause for the
0 clause or create a new function containing the code to be shared by the 0 e3 case
clauses. However, these alternatives create unnecessary complexity. The FALLTHRU
comment makes the developer’s intentions clear with no extra code. C# has a reasonableworkaround using a goto statement that is syntactically illegal in C or C þþ and not
MISRA-compliant:
switch (i) {
case 0:
handle_zero();
goto case 1;
case 1:case 2:case 3:
process(i);audit( “handle_input” , i);
post_buffer();
break;
default:
audit( “Unexpected input ”, i);
reset();
break;
}
3.5.4.11 Importance of Management Resolve
Change is always difﬁcult, and experience has shown that the best intentions of incorporating
important code-quality controls all too often fall by the wayside when the efforts hit snags suchas disagreements with rules or retroﬁt edits, tedious coding workarounds, or productdevelopment schedule pressures.Secure Embedded Software Development 131

--- Page 142 ---
Key Point
It is absolutely critical that management decide the course, invest in the initial retroﬁt cost and
schedule, and then stay the course until a high-quality coding standard is ﬁrmly entrenched into
the development system and indoctrinated throughout the engineering organization.
Implementing a new process is like entering the playoffs in professional basketball. The winner
is often not the best shooting team but rather the team that has the fortitude to play a strong,stubborn defense for every play of every game of the series. Managers need to be stubborn anddemand compliance until the project is complete.
3.5.4.12 Case Study: Netrino Embedded C Coding StandardNetrino is an embedded systems consulting ﬁrm whose president, Michael Barr, has authored
an embedded software coding standard for C programmers.
13For development organizations
looking to create a coding standard for the ﬁrst time, Embedded C Coding Standard is
a worthwhile read and an excellent starting point.
The Netrino coding standard dedicates approximately one-half of its rules to stylistic concerns,
ranging from the use of braces, spaces, and alignment to naming conventions and commentstyle. While developers new to coding standards may be surprised to see this emphasis onarguably subjective content, the importance of stylistic standards should not beunderestimated. These rules promote code readability and maintainability that ultimatelycontributes to software reliability and security. Many software style rules can be automaticallyenforced with code beautiﬁers such as Uncrustify , reducing peer review workload.
The Netrino coding standard also attempts to indicate when rules should be enforceable withautomated tools. For example, one excellent rule, 4.3.c, “Each source ﬁle shall be free ofunused include ﬁles ” is advisable for any coding standard. Extraneous include ﬁles can
occasionally harm code efﬁciency (e.g., a reference within a header ﬁle could cause librarycode to be pulled into a link when it otherwise would not), increase code complexity for nobeneﬁt, and make software more difﬁcult to maintain (e.g., a change in the header ﬁle mayaffect the source ﬁle including it). The Netrino standard points out that this rule can beautomatically enforced with lint, a lightweight open source static analyzer. While lint(and its
brethren, such as splint
14) may require signiﬁcant investment in terms of conﬁguration to avoid
false positives, the tool may be a reasonable addition to the developer’s toolbox, alongsidemore professional static analyzers that specialize in locating sophisticated software bugs whileminimizing false positives.
Netrino’s standard requires the use of C99 dialect if available. As of this writing, C99 is the
latest ratiﬁed version of C programming language
15and adds several desirable features for
code quality, such as the ability to use C þþstyle // comments and the ability to declare for132 Chapter 3

--- Page 143 ---
loop iteration variables within the initial loop statement. Before allowing C99, however,
developers should consider all its additions; features such as variable-length arrays may behighly undesirable (cause unexpectedly high runtime stack use and increase the probability ofoverﬂow). They should consult with embedded software specialists like Netrino and/ordevelopment tool suppliers to see what level of conﬁguration of C99 may be possible within thetool chain. At the time of this writing, another revision of the C language, called C1X,
16is in
the works. The latest revision of C þþ,Cþþ11, was released in August 2011.17One welcome
software reliability addition to C þþ11 is static_assert , compile-time assertions. While these
can be implemented in the older versions of C or C þþusing typedef trickery, the acceptance
into the standard should encourage developers to make good use of them. Unlike runtimeassertions, which incur execution overhead (often leading them to be omitted from a ﬁnalproduct), static assertions have no impact on program execution. C þþdevelopers are
encouraged to explore the C þþ11 standard and consult with their development tool suppliers
for availability of conformant products.
The Netrino standard disallows unconditional jumps: goto,continue, and the use of a break
statement to exit a loop. While this is a sensible rule and certainly a good idea for new code,
experience has shown that retroﬁtting this rule to large code bases can be hazardous. Somecode bases simply make proﬂigate use of these jumps, especially the goto statement. This rule
is also one that is likely to be met with vigorous argument over a reasonable use of the goto
statement da means to centralize error-handling code that, by design, requires unconditional
termination of processing. For example, the following open source Integrated DeviceElectronics (IDE) device driver function (portions elided for brevity) that handles the manycases of writes to an I/O port uses no fewer than 18 goto statements, all of which are used to
terminate processing due to a fatal error condition and execute some cleanup work:
static void ide_ioport_write(void *opaque, uint32_t addr, uint32_t val)
{
IDEState *ide_if = opaque;IDEState *s;int unit, n;int lba48 = 0;
#ifdef DEBUG_IDE
printf( “IDE: write addr=0x%x val=0x%02x\n ”, addr, val);
#endif
addr &= 7;switch(addr) {
case WIN_READ:
case WIN_READ_ONCE:
if (!s->bs)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_cmd_lba48_transform(s, lba48);
s->req_nb_sectors = 1;ide_sector_read(s);break;Secure Embedded Software Development 133

--- Page 144 ---
case WIN_MULTREAD:
if (!s->mult_sectors)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_cmd_lba48_transform(s, lba48);
s->req_nb_sectors = s->mult_sectors;
ide_sector_read(s);break;
case CFA_WRITE_MULTI_WO_ERASE:
if (!s->mult_sectors)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_cmd_lba48_transform(s, lba48);
s->error = 0;
s->status = SEEK_STAT | READY_STAT;s->req_nb_sectors = s->mult_sectors;
n = s->nsector;
if (n > s->req_nb_sectors)
n = s->req_nb_sectors;
ide_transfer_start(s, s->io_buffer, 512 * n,
ide_sector_write);
s->media_changed = 1;break;
case WIN_READDMA:case WIN_READDMA_ONCE:
if (!s->bs)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_cmd_lba48_transform(s, lba48);ide_sector_read_dma(s);
break;
case WIN_WRITEDMA:
case WIN_WRITEDMA_ONCE:
if (!s->bs)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_cmd_lba48_transform(s, lba48);ide_sector_write_dma(s);
s->media_changed = 1;
break;
case WIN_SETFEATURES:
if (!s->bs)
goto abort_cmd;
switch(s->feature) {
case 0xcc: /* reverting to power-on defaults enable */
case 0x66: /* reverting to power-on defaults disable */case 0x02: /* write cache enable */case 0x82: /* write cache disable */
case 0xaa: /* read look-ahead enable */
case 0x55: /* read look-ahead disable */case 0x05: /* set advanced power management mode */
case 0x85: /* disable advanced power management mode */
case 0x42: /* enable Automatic Acoustic Mode */case 0xc2: /* disable Automatic Acoustic Mode */134 Chapter 3

--- Page 145 ---
s->status = READY_STAT | SEEK_STAT;
ide_set_irq(s);
break;
case 0x03: { /* set transfer mode */
uint8_t val = s->nsector & 0x07;
switch (s->nsector >> 3) {
case 0x00: /* pio default */case 0x01: /* pio mode */
put_le16(s->identify_data + 63,0x07);put_le16(s->identify_data + 88,0x3f);break;
case 0x04: /* mdma mode */
put_le16(s->identify_data + 63,0x07 | (1 << (val +
8)));
put_le16(s->identify_data + 88,0x3f);break;
case 0x08: /* udma mode */
put_le16(s->identify_data + 63,0x07);put_le16(s->identify_data + 88,0x3f | (1 << (val +
8)));
break;
default:
goto abort_cmd;
}
s->status = READY_STAT | SEEK_STAT;
ide_set_irq(s);break;
}default:
goto abort_cmd;
}
break;
case WIN_SRST:
if (!s->is_cdrom)
goto abort_cmd;
ide_set_signature(s);s->status = 0x00; /* NOTE: READY is _not_ set */
s->error = 0x01;
break;
case WIN_PACKETCMD:
if (!s->is_cdrom)
goto abort_cmd;
/* overlapping commands not supported */if (s->feature & 0x02)
goto abort_cmd;
s->status = READY_STAT;s->atapi_dma = s->feature & 1;
s->nsector = 1;
ide_transfer_start(s, s->io_buffer, ATAPI_PACKET_SIZE,
ide_atapi_cmd);Secure Embedded Software Development 135

--- Page 146 ---
break;
/* CF-ATA commands */
case CFA_REQ_EXT_ERROR_CODE:
if (!s->is_cf)
goto abort_cmd;
s->error = 0x09; /* miscellaneous error */s->status = READY_STAT;ide_set_irq(s);
break;
case CFA_ERASE_SECTORS:
case CFA_WEAR_LEVEL:
if (!s->is_cf)
goto abort_cmd;
if (val == CFA_WEAR_LEVEL)
s->nsector = 0;
if (val == CFA_ERASE_SECTORS)
s->media_changed = 1;
s->error = 0x00;s->status = READY_STAT;ide_set_irq(s);break;
case CFA_TRANSLATE_SECTOR:
if (!s->is_cf)
goto abort_cmd;
s->error = 0x00;s->status = READY_STAT;memset(s->io_buffer, 0, 0x200);
s->io_buffer[0x00] = s->hcyl; /* Cyl MSB */
s->io_buffer[0x01] = s->lcyl; /* Cyl LSB */s->io_buffer[0x02] = s->select; /* Head */s->io_buffer[0x03] = s->sector; /* Sector */
s->io_buffer[0x04] = ide_get_sector(s) >> 16;/* LBA MSB */
s->io_buffer[0x05] = ide_get_sector(s) >> 8; /* LBA */s->io_buffer[0x06] = ide_get_sector(s) >> 0; /* LBA LSB */
s->io_buffer[0x13] = 0x00; /* Erase ﬂag */
s->io_buffer[0x18] = 0x00; /* Hot count */
s->io_buffer[0x19] = 0x00; /* Hot count */
s->io_buffer[0x1a] = 0x01; /* Hot count */
ide_transfer_start(s, s->io_buffer, 0x200,
ide_transfer_stop);
ide_set_irq(s);break;
case CFA_ACCESS_METADATA_STORAGE:
if (!s->is_cf)
goto abort_cmd;
switch (s->feature) {case 0x02: /* Inquiry Metadata Storage */
ide_cfata_metadata_inquiry(s);break;
case 0x03: /* Read Metadata Storage */136 Chapter 3

--- Page 147 ---
ide_cfata_metadata_read(s);
break;
case 0x04: /* Write Metadata Storage */
ide_cfata_metadata_write(s);break;
default:
goto abort_cmd;
}ide_transfer_start(s, s->io_buffer, 0x200,
ide_transfer_stop);
s->status = 0x00; /* NOTE: READY is _not_ set */ide_set_irq(s);
break;
case IBM_SENSE_CONDITION:
if (!s->is_cf)
goto abort_cmd;
switch (s->feature) {
case 0x01: /* sense temperature in device */
s->nsector = 0x50; /* +20 C */
break;
default:
goto abort_cmd;
}s->status = READY_STAT;
ide_set_irq(s);
break;
default:
abort_cmd:
ide_abort_command(s);
ide_set_irq(s);break;
}
}
}
While the preceding code will not be nominated for any awards, the example does demonstrate
an effective use of the goto statement. We include this sizeable software fragment in the text to
demonstrate that retroﬁtting some rules can be problematic.
When an organization is retroﬁtting, an advisable approach is to speculatively enable each rule,
in turn, in a local checkout of the project code to ascertain the quantity of violations andestimate the redress work. Management should not abandon a good rule simply becausesigniﬁcant engineering is required to implement it. If possible, the organization should allow forindividual approved management exceptions. However, when faced with a conceptually soundcode-quality rule whose implementation is intractable, the organization also should considera compromise approach. In the preceding goto situation, a compromise rule could be applied:
The continue statement shall not be used.
The break shall not be used to terminate a loop.Secure Embedded Software Development 137

--- Page 148 ---
Use of the goto statement is disallowed, with the exception of safe, centralized error
handling.
The Netrino standard includes naming requirements for functions used as entry points for
threads and interrupt service routines (ISRs). These rules are an excellent example of howembedded coding standards often include features not found in general-purpose codingstandards.
As mentioned previously, while it stresses the use of automated checks, the Netrino
standard includes a reasonable percentage of rules that may require enforcement via peerreview.
Key Point
Management should carefully limit the number of coding standard controls that must be
manually enforced; if that number is too large, either peer reviews will become overly inefﬁcient orenforcement of those rules will become lax and ultimately irrelevant.
3.5.4.13 Dynamic Code Analysis
Key Point
A secure development process should employ dynamic code analysis in addition to static codeanalysis.
A simple example demonstrates this need. The following code will be ﬂagged as an error by
a static source code analyzer:
int *getval(void)
{
return 0;
}void foo(void)
{
int *b = getval();
*b = 0;
}
The pointer bis initialized by the return value from a function call that obviously returns
a NULL pointer. Then b, the NULL pointer, is dereferenced.
However, the following similar code may not be ﬂagged as an error by a static source code
analyzer:138 Chapter 3

--- Page 149 ---
int fd;
int *getval(void)
{
int *tmp;
read(fd, &tmp, sizeof(tmp));
return tmp;
}void foo(void)
{
int *b = getval();
*b = 0;
}
In this example, bis also initialized by the return value from a function call. However, the
source code provides no indication of potential return values from the function call. In
particular, the return value is read from a ﬁle. While the ﬁle may well contain an invalidpointer, causing this program to crash, many static analyzers will adopt a conservativeapproach (to minimize false positives) and will not assume anything speciﬁc about theexternally read data.
Dynamic analysis uses code instrumentation or a simulation environment to perform checks of
the code as it executes. For example, an instrumented program will have a check prior to thedereference of bwhich validates that bis not NULL. Or a simulator can validate all memory
references to check for writes to address 0.
Some compilers have dynamic code analysis instrumentation available as a standard option.
The development process should require that these checks be enabled at appropriate stages ofdevelopment, testing, and integration. For example, the Green Hills Software compiler has theoptionecheck ¼memory, which causes the maximum amount of dynamic analysis
instrumentation for various forms of memory errors, including NULL pointer dereferences.The instrumented code performs the check and then calls a diagnostic function, provided bya library that is automatically linked to the program when using this option, which informs theuser that a fault occurred as well as the type and location of the error within the source code:
> gcc myfile.c echeck=memory
> ./a.out
Nil pointer dereference on line 15 in file myfile.c
This is one example in which the program likely would have crashed, helping the developer
locate the program, even if dynamic analysis were not enabled. However, many other kinds offailures are far more insidious, leading to subtle corruptions that may go completely unnoticed
or cause a downstream failure that is extremely difﬁcult to trace back to its root cause.
Dynamic analysis detects the fault at its source, turning a thorny bug into a trivial one.
Let’s examine a few other examples of dynamic code analysis controls that developers should
use during development and testing.Secure Embedded Software Development 139

--- Page 150 ---
3.5.4.13.1 Buffer Overﬂow
There are many forms of buffer overﬂow errors, many of which will not be caught by static
analysis because the amount of data being written to a buffer is unknown at build time. Thefollowing is a simple example:
int an_array[10];
void a_func(int index)
{
an_array[index] = 0;
}
If the parameter passed to a_ func is a value read from a ﬁle or message queue by a caller to
a_ func, most static analyzers will conservatively ignore this array reference. However, if
index turns out to be a value greater than nine, a dynamic analyzer will catch the fault, as
shown here:
> gcc myfile.c echeck=bounds
> ./a.out
Array index out of bounds on line 50 in file myfile.c
3.5.4.13.2 Assignment Bounds
The C and C þþprogramming languages (especially C) suffer from a lack of strong, compile-
time enforced-type safety that languages such as Ada and C# provide. However, quality coding
standards as well as the use of static and dynamic analysis can provide reasonablecompensation for these language limitations. Integer overﬂow is one risk of weak typing, asshown in the following example:
void assign(unsigned int p)
{
static volatile unsigned short s;s=p ;
}void myfunc(void)
{
assign(65536);
}
This code fragment is perfectly legal ANSI C; the assignment of ptosis deﬁned to truncate p’s
value to ﬁt s’s type. In typical implementations, an unsigned short integer occupies 16 bits of
storage, allowing values in the range of 0 to 65,535. However, in the example, a value just
beyond this range is passed as the parameter p, clearly a programming error. Yet standard
compilers will not emit even a warning on the preceding code sequence.
Dynamic analysis can detect assignments of values that are out of range for a type, even if the
values are read externally (e.g., from a ﬁle). The analyzer build command and output for thepreceding example may look as follows:140 Chapter 3

--- Page 151 ---
> gcc myfile.c echeck=assignbound
> ./a.out
Assignment out of bounds on line 57 in file myfile.c
3.5.4.13.3 Missing Case
Most imperative programming languages, such as C, C þþ, C#, and Java, have a switch/case
selection control equivalent. It is perfectly legal in these languages to have a switch
statement whose case arms do not cover all possible values of the control expression type.
For example:
typedef enum { red, yellow, blue, green } colors;void carcolors(colors c){
switch (c) {
case red:
printf( “red\n ”);
break;
case yellow:
printf( “yellow\n ”);
break;
case blue:
printf( “blue\n ”);
break;
}
}
Despite the legality of the preceding code, some compilers and static analyzers will emit
a diagnostic, complaining of a lack of case to handle the value of green forswitch control c.F o r
example, the open source GCC compiler will emit a warning when passed the -Wall option that
enables some checks beyond the language standard:
> gcc myfile.c eWall
myfile.c: In function ‘carcolors ’:
myfile.c:64: warning: enumeration value ‘blue ’not handled in switch
Some programmers will include a default case arm as a matter of habit to ensure that all
possible values of the control variable are handled and avoid such warnings. However, thisapproach is not always a good idea. A catchall case can lead to unintended consequences inwhich the default handling is not appropriate for all inputs. For this reason, some high-
assurance coding standards eschew the use of the default case whenever practical and instead
promote the use of explicit cases for all expected control values.
In the preceding example, the programmer may know that the cars can be only red, yellow, andblue (no green cars). But what if some day green cars are invented? Will the software beupdated to reﬂect this new reality? The preceding carcolor function will compile and execute,
but the lack of green handling could have unintended consequences. Once again, in such cases
dynamic analysis can be used as a code-quality enforcement mechanism. If a switch statementSecure Embedded Software Development 141

--- Page 152 ---
is passed a value for its control variable that matches no existing case, then the dynamic
analyzer will generate a runtime exception:
> gcc myfile.c echeck=switch
> ./a.out
Case/switch index out of bounds on line 7 in file myfile.c
3.5.4.13.4 Stack Overﬂow
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed MISRA C rule 15.2, which prohibits recursion to avoid
runtime stack overﬂow, and how static detection of cycles in a complicated program’s callgraph can be difﬁcult due to indirect function calls. Furthermore, programs devoid of recursioncan also suffer from stack overﬂow simply due to a long function call sequence and/orexcessive automatic storage usage.
Detecting stack overﬂow is critical both for reliability and security of embedded systems.
Embedded systems are often memory constrained, requiring system designers to carefullyallocate and minimize stack usage for all processes and threads. Stack overﬂows may manifestthemselves in subtle corruptions that are difﬁcult to track down during development and testing.Overﬂow vulnerabilities that go undetected during product development may cause ﬁeldedprograms to crash. Attackers who become aware of stack overﬂow vulnerabilities can use themto subvert execution in numerous ways. For example, a stack overﬂow triggered by crafted inputto one thread may overwrite the data in a second thread, causing it to crash or execute malware.
Key Point
Whenever possible, a static analysis tool should be used to check for the largest potential runtime
stack memory requirements for a program or for all threads in a multi-threaded program.
Your tool chain provider should include a tool for this purpose. However, because of the
aforementioned indirect function call dilemma, maximum potential runtime stack memoryrequirement cannot always be computed statically.
In Chapter 2, we discussed how virtual memory-capable embedded operating systems could
employ guard pages to detect stack overﬂow at runtime. For developers not using a virtualmemory operating system, a second option for dynamic analysis of stack overﬂow is toinstrument the program with overﬂow checks in the prologue of each function call. Thisfeature is available in some compilers and may not be appropriate for multi-threadedapplications. Building a program that overﬂows its stack would generate an appropriateruntime error, halting execution when the stack pointer ﬁrst exceeds the bounds of the
allocated runtime stack:
> gcc myfile.c echeck=stack
> ./a.out
Stack overflow142 Chapter 3

--- Page 153 ---
If no documented dynamic stack overﬂow detection option exists in a tool chain or operating
system, a developer should consider the following do-it-yourself method that works reasonablywell. Most operating systems have a hook for executing a developer-deﬁned function call onevery system context-switch as well as a means of reading each thread’s stack pointer and thelocation of the thread’s allocated stack segment. The context-switch function can simplycompare the stack pointer of the thread about to be executed with the thread’s runtime stackbounds. On most computers, stacks grow downward to lower addresses, so a comparison thatshows a stack pointer below the bottom of its allocated stack segment would generate an alarm,audit record, and so on. Readers should consult operating system documentation for thecommon context-switch hook feature.
3.5.4.13.5 Memory Leaks
One of the major reliability beneﬁts touted by the Java language is its avoidance ofprogrammer-controlled dynamic heap memory allocation by using automatic garbagecollection. However, many embedded applications use dynamic memory allocation and sufferfrom vulnerabilities due to improper memory management errors. Many such errors can beprevented via dynamic code analysis.
Memory leaks are one class of memory management error. A memory leak occurs when
a function allocates memory but never releases it. If the function is called sporadically, then theloss of memory may be gradual, escaping detection until a system is ﬁeld deployed.Furthermore, if an attacker is aware of a leaking function, it can focus its attention on causingthe function to be executed, draining the system of memory resources and forcing a systemfailure.
A search of the memory leak vulnerabilities in the NIST’s National Vulnerability Database
uncovers numerous instances in commercial products, including security appliances. Forexample, CVE-2010-2836 is a recent high-severity security vulnerability identiﬁed in the SSLvirtual private network (VPN) feature of Cisco’s network appliance operating system calledIOS. The vulnerability enables remote attackers to cause a denial of service via memoryexhaustion by improperly disconnecting SSL sessions.
18
Memory leak detection is a form of dynamic analysis that eliminates programmer leakvulnerabilities. Leak detection works by comparing a program’s pointer references to thememory management library’s outstanding allocations. A program’s pointer references mayreside in memory-resident data variables, runtime automatic stack storage, or CPU registers.The memory leak detector, therefore, is usually offered as a tightly integrated feature of thedeveloper tool chain (compiler, runtime libraries).
Memory leaks can occur at any time during a program’s lifetime. The runtime library can
perform its memory leak detection algorithm at sensible call points (such as when memory isallocated or released). In addition, the user can add explicit calls to the memory leak detectionalgorithm as a sanity check at regular intervals in time or at speciﬁc points in the applicationSecure Embedded Software Development 143

--- Page 154 ---
code. Leak detection can be performed during debugging, during testing, or even in
a ﬁelded product.
Ideally, the memory management library is able to record an execution call stack within its
allocation database. When the leak detection algorithm identiﬁes a leak, the call stack can bereported to the developer, making it easy to identify the speciﬁc allocation that has been lefthanging.
A static source code analyzer should detect the simple memory leak error shown next.
However, as with the other cases discussed in this section, many forms of leaks are beyond theinsight of static analysis and require dynamic leak detection.
void leak(void)
{
char *buf = malloc(100);sprintf(buf, “some stuff\n ”);
printf(buf);
}int main(){
leaks();__malloc_ ﬁndleaks(); // call the leak detector
}
In the preceding example, the leak function allocates memory pointed to by a local variable and
never deallocates the memory. Upon return from the function, therefore, this memory is leaked.A call to the runtime library’s leak detector will report the leak:
Figure 3.4:
Memory leak detection integrated into software development environment.144 Chapter 3

--- Page 155 ---
> gcc myfile.c echeck=memory
> ./a.out
Unreferenced memory adr=0x18d40 allocated at 0x103f4 called from 0x1043c then 0x15f18then 0x10028
When integrated with the software development environment, the leak detection report’s call
stack addresses are mapped to actual source code locations, enabling the developer to moreeasily locate and understand the leak source (see Figure 3.4 ).
For the precise name of the leak detection applications programming interface (API) and build-time options used to enable leak detection, readers should consult a tool chain supplier.
3.5.4.13.6 Other Dynamic Memory Allocation Errors
With programmatic control of memory allocation and deallocation, there are many more waysfor developers to shoot themselves in the foot. The following simple function shows a couplemore examples:
void badalloc(void)
{
char *buf = malloc(100);
char localbuf[100];
free(buf);
free(localbuf);free(buf);
}
The ﬁrst call to free(buf) is ﬁne; it references a valid allocated buffer. However, the second call
tofree(buf) is invalid, since bufhas already been deallocated. The call to free(localbuf) is also
invalid because localbuf is a local buffer, not allocated using a corresponding dynamic memory
allocation call such as malloc orcalloc . Similar errors in C þþoccur with the operators new
anddelete . Once again, static analysis can locate the errors in this example, but dynamic
analysis will ﬁnd other memory allocation errors that static checking cannot. For example, the
following change will confuse many static analyzers:
char localbuf[100];
char *b = localbuf;
void badalloc(void)
{
free(b);
}
Because the variable bis now globally deﬁned, a static source code analyzer may assume less
knowledge about that to which bmay point. Dynamic analysis detects the invalid deallocation
during program execution:
> gcc myfile.c echeck=memory
> ./a.out
Attempt to free something not allocated adr=0x18484Secure Embedded Software Development 145

--- Page 156 ---
If dynamic analysis is integrated into the debugger, the preceding failure is even easier for the
developer to detect and correct. As shown in Figure 3.5 , the debugger is automatically halted
when the memory deallocation error occurs, pointing the developer to the exact offending lineof code.
It goes without saying that software managers should strongly weigh the diagnostic capability
of a compiler and tool chain when selecting such an important tool.
3.5.5 Software Testing and Veriﬁcation
Key Point
A comprehensive test regimen, including functional, regression, performance, and coverage
testing, is well known to be one of the best mechanisms to assure that software is reliable andsecure.
Testing is an important component of many high-assurance development standards and
guidance documents, such as that promulgated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.19
Figure 3.5:
A dynamic analysis error stops the program at the offending line in the debugger, making it easy for
the developer to locate and ﬁx common security vulnerabilities.146 Chapter 3

--- Page 157 ---
In the realm of functional testing, we have fault-based testing, error-based testing, stress
testing, white-box testing, and black-box testing.
Two approaches to testing are almost always required to ensure security. First, all software
within security-critical components must be covered by some form of functional test.Coverage is veriﬁed using code coverage tools. Furthermore, all security-critical softwaremust be traceable to the software’s component requirements. Software that fails to traceback to a test and to a requirement is more likely to introduce latent securityvulnerabilities.
3.5.5.1 Modiﬁed Condition/Decision Coverage
Because code coverage analysis is so important for security, it is worth examining the various
levels of coverage testing that can be applied to embedded software. To aid this discussion, weconsider the code coverage requirements across the ﬁve assurance levels speciﬁed in thestandard that the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) uses to perform safetycertiﬁcation of commercial aircraft. This standard, published by RTCA, is titled Software
Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certiﬁcation , commonly referred to as
DO-178B.
20In fact, DO-178B is the most commonly used software safety standard in the
worldwide avionics industry.
The ﬁve assurance levels, in increasing level of criticality, of DO-178B are as follows:
Level E: Failure has no impact on ﬂight safety.
Lev
el D: Failure impact is minor, noticeable but not critical to ﬂight safety (e.g., passenger
inconvenience).
Level C: Failure impact is major, safety-related but not severe (e.g., passenger discomfort
but not injury).Level B: Failure impact is severe (e.g., passenger injury).
Level A: Failure impact is catastrophic (e.g., aircraft crash).
The structural code coverage requirements corresponding to each assurance level are shown inthefollo
wing table:
Assurance Level Structural Coverage Requirement
E None
D None
C Statement
B Decision
A Modiﬁed Condition/Decision
DO-178B Level C requires statement coverage : demonstrating that every program
statement has been executed at least once (covered) by the veriﬁcation test regimen.Secure Embedded Software Development 147

--- Page 158 ---
Statement coverage is what most developers equate with the more general term code
coverage.
Level B augments statement coverage with decision coverage , a requirement that every
decision point in the program has been executed with all possible outcomes. For example,
a conditional branch’s comparison both succeeds (branch taken) and fails (branch not taken) atleast once each.
Finally, modiﬁed condition/decision coverage (MC/DC) augments decision coverage with
a specialized form of condition coverage in which each condition within a decision must be
shown to have an independent effect on the outcome of that decision.We use a few simple code examples to illustrate the increasing rigor and security-enforcing
quality of each coverage approach:
if (a || b || c) {
<code executed on true decision>
}
Statement coverage requires that the ifstatement is executed and that the code within the if
block (executed on a true decision) is fully executed. As there are no statements correspondingto a false decision, statement coverage would not require any test cases that force the ifblock
not to execute.
In contrast, decision coverage would require at least one test to execute the false decision path,
even though there is no explicit code associated with that path. This extra coverage is desirable
from a security perspective because it indicates that the developer has considered the impact of
a false decision, which may have some other side effects. Let’s consider this slightly moredetailed example:
uint32_t divisor = 0;
if (a || b || c) {
divisor = a | b | c;
}result /= divisor;
The ﬁnal division statement will fail (divide by zero) on a false decision, but statement
coverage testing may never activate this pathway. If an attacker were somehow able to controlthe decision (e.g., by controlling the values of a,b, and c), then the attacker could cause
a denial of service (program crash). Decision coverage testing would have pointed out thisproblem before it could be ﬁelded.
Condition coverage requires that each condition within the decision be tested with true
and false values. The following two test cases will force each of the three conditions totake on both a true and a false value at least once: ( a¼1,b¼1,c¼1) and ( a¼0,b¼0,
c¼0).148 Chapter 3

--- Page 159 ---
While testing a decision’s constituent conditions may seem like an improvement over decision
coverage, condition coverage is not a superset of decision coverage, as shown in this example:
if (a || !b) {
<code executed on true decision>
} else {
<code executed on false decision>
}
The two test cases, ( a¼0,b¼0) and ( a¼1,b¼1), satisfy condition coverage (both conditions
executed with true and false inputs) but neglect to cover the false decision path. Clearly,decision and condition coverage techniques used in concert is desirable.
Multiple condition coverage requires all combinations of conditions. In other words, every row
of a decision’s truth table must have a corresponding test case. In the earlier test case with
conditions a,b, and c, the truth table is as follows:
a b c result
FFF F
FFT T
FTF TFTT T
TFF TTFT TTTF T
TTT T
Thus, multiple condition coverage requires 2ntests, where n is the number of independent
conditions. This approach is viewed as impractical; exhaustive condition testing would simply
take too many test cases and too long to execute.
Languages with short-circuiting Boolean operators (e.g., C, C þþ, Java) reduce the number of
required test cases:
a b c result
FFF F
FFT TFT- T
T-- T
Nevertheless, compound Boolean expressions may yield an impractical explosion in test cases
across realistic programs.
MC/DC is the selected compromise for most high-assurance safety and security standards.
MC/DC includes both decision and condition coverage. However, in addition, MC/DC requiresSecure Embedded Software Development 149

--- Page 160 ---
that each condition be demonstrated to have an independent effect on the decision. This
modiﬁed condition requirement is accomplished by varying a single condition while holdingthe remainder constant and verifying that the decision changes. Let’s consider the followingexample:
if (a || b || c || d) {
<code executed on true decision>
}
MC/DC requires the following test cases (shown in truth table form):
a b c d result
FFFF F
T FFF T
F T FF T
FF T FT
FFF T T
The italicized values below each condition are the test cases that cover both true and falseinputs and result in both a true and false result when all other condition inputs are heldconstant. For uncoupled conditions, MC/DC requires N þ1 test cases, where N is the number of
Boolean conditions. This linear growth in test cases makes MC/DC practical to implement, andits effectiveness in locating testing gaps as well as design ﬂaws is well regarded anddocumented.
21
Key Point
We strongly recommend the use of MC/DC coverage testing for the most critical components of
an embedded system dfor example, the operating system kernel, network security protocols, and
cryptographic components.
MC/DC may be overkill for some de-privileged applications. The converse is that system
designers should not assume that MC/DC coverage implies perfect testing. Limitations of (andimprovements to) the traditional MC/DC deﬁnition have been reported.
22
There are numerous other aspects of a program to test for coverage other than code executionﬂow. For example, if the program has an enumerated type with ﬁve possible values, it would besensible to validate that all ﬁve values are at least used somewhere in the program.
Another problem with code coverage testing is the loss of ﬁdelity when translating from source
to machine code. In some cases, it is preferable that code coverage testing be performed on themachine code. By doing so, we increase the assurance that malicious code is not instrumentedas part of the build process (see the Thompson Hack case study earlier in this chapter). In fact,150 Chapter 3

--- Page 161 ---
machine code coverage is required by some high-assurance security and safety certiﬁcations.
Let’s examine the following simple function:
int foo(int a, int b, int *arr, int n)
{
int i;
for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
arr[i] += a / b;
}return i;
}
The loop body contains a divide operation in which numerator and denominator are both
loop invariant. A compiler would like to hoist this divide outside the loop to improveperformance:
int foo(int a, int b, int *arr, int n)
{
int i;int tmp = a / b;for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
arr[i] += tmp;
}return i;
}
However, this optimization is disallowed because it changes the function’s semantics. In the
pre-optimized version, the divide may never be executed (if the loop itself is never executed,i.e., argument nis zero). In the optimized version, the divide is unconditionally executed. If the
argument bis zero, then the optimization could theoretically induce a program crash that might
not otherwise occur.
But compilers are smart! Most compilers will hoist the divide but introduce a guard against
zero division:
int foo(int a, int b, int *arr, int n)
{
int i, tmp;if (b != 0)
t m p=a/b ;
for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
arr[i] += tmp;
}return i;
}
The preceding code shows the compiler optimization visualized as source code changes. Of
course, the compiler performs this optimization as it is generating the machine code.Therefore, the machine code contains a new decision, b!¼0, that was not present in the sourceSecure Embedded Software Development 151

--- Page 162 ---
code. A code coverage tool that operates on source code alone would fail to cover this
additional decision.
If a code coverage tool is capable of providing decision coverage but not MC/DC, the source
can be modiﬁed to remove compound conditions. With singleton conditions throughout, MC/DC reduces to decision or branch coverage:
if (a || b) {...}
modiﬁed to
if (a)
if (b) { ... }
While this approach may seem heavy-handed, it can be acceptable because the amount ofcritical code requiring MC/DC level testing is often relatively small.
Key Point
A lack of complete test coverage almost always points to a lack of other important validation
(e.g., functional testing), design ﬂaws, or simply latent code that has unknown and potentiallysecurity-relevant impact.
It is left as an exercise for readers to explore other various types of testing and their relative
advantages. Beyond the important example of coverage testing, our guidance is moreconcerned with the integration of testing methodology into the development process to
maximize its value.
Organizations that do not follow a rigorous development process often resort to ad hoc testing
that is often an afterthought when most of the software has already been written. Organizationsthat follow a rigorous process often focus testing during a release process, again after much ofthe software has been written.
Key Point
The testing system should be running 24x7.
If a testing system is run only on demand, occasionally, or only during a release process, thenerrors that can be detected by the testing system tend to go unnoticed for an unnecessarily
long period of time. When a ﬂaw is discovered, the developer has a much harder time
trying to remediate it than if the ﬂaw was introduced the previous day. In some cases, thedeveloper may have moved on to another project, if not another company, leaving someoneelse to try to learn the code and ﬁx the ﬂaw. Fixing ﬂaws discovered by the testing systemshould be prioritized higher than anything other than emergency customer support issues;152 Chapter 3

--- Page 163 ---
keeping the system running cleanly at all times guarantees that test system failures are
almost always new failures that have not been examined by anyone else and need immediateattention.
Key Point
The testing system should run on actively developed products as well as currently shipping
products.
This key point is a corollary to the previous key point but important enough to be stressed:
when a testing system is used throughout the development process, developers are forced tokeep the product in a working state at all times. Software projects that move to rigorous testonly after a code freeze are subjected to test phases that last longer overall because developersmust wrestle with problems inserted throughout months of development time. When a productis always working, a code freeze leads directly to ﬁnal quality assurance testing, saving time tomarket. If a developer cannot develop code in a manner that prevents the product from failing,then a private branch can be used as long as it is not allowed to live too long; integrating oldcode branches that have drifted far from the trunk often causes unforeseen conﬂicts that affectthe efﬁciency of the entire development team.
Key Point
The testing system should be able to effectively test a software project in less than one night.
A testing system that takes too long to run tends to become underutilized if not completelyignored. Developers should be able to quickly validate a change overnight before committingit to the project. In addition, the automated tests running 24x7 on dedicated testing computefarms can detect ﬂaws very quickly so they can be corrected while the understanding of therecently added code is still fresh in the developer’s mind. It is reasonable to have more teststhat can run in one night; however, longer runs should compete at a lower priority forcomputing resources or be run only on demand or at longer intervals during the developmentprocess. The nightly test run must be good enough to detect almost all ﬂaws added duringdevelopment.
Key Point
It should be trivial to determine when a test run has succeeded or failed; a failed test should be
trivial to reproduce.Secure Embedded Software Development 153

--- Page 164 ---
Tests should be written such that output is generated only when an error is detected. A clean
test is one without any output. At worst, the output should be less than a page long. Too often,testing systems generate voluminous output, making it difﬁcult for developers to quicklyascertain the status of the test run. Test output that is difﬁcult to quickly evaluate tends to beineffectual and ignored.
When a test fails, the exact state of the software system and any inputs or process that must be
used to reproduce the discovered error should be clearly displayed within the test output. If thedeveloper is unable to efﬁciently reproduce a test failure, the test system will tend to beignored. Reproducibility is the key to maximizing the rate at which the developer canremediate ﬂaws discovered by the testing system and bring a reliable software product tomarket faster.
3.5.6 Development Process Efﬁciency
Although there is signiﬁcant evidence that following a structured, comprehensive softwarequality management process security improves relative to the use of unstructured processes,these rigid methodologies often cause a loss in efﬁciency, delayed time to market, and
frustration in the daily lives of software developers and managers. The key is to implement
techniques that are compatible with the requirements of high-assurance quality standards yetdesigned and proven to improve efﬁciency of software development. The goal is to maximizethe reliability to production cost ratio of software.
When software changes rapidly, the efﬁciency of the build process becomes a critical
component of developer efﬁciency. Complex software projects are often characterized bycomplex build processes, in which the software not only takes a long time to recompile fromscratch, but also may require many recompiles to exercise different production conﬁgurations.For example, a software system may have a “production” build, in which compileroptimizations are fully enabled and the software is conﬁgured for maximum speed andreliability; a “debug” build, in which the system has debugging information enabled so thatdevelopers can most easily debug the software; and a “checked” build, in which the systemturns on additional sanity checks that may drastically reduce performance but increase theprobability of ﬁnding unusual problems such as RAM hardware failures.
During development, it may not be practical for a developer to build all conﬁgurations to test
a change. Therefore, an autobuild system should be used. When a change is committed to the
conﬁguration management system, dedicated build servers update their local checkouts of thesoftware and rebuild all conﬁgurations. When a build fails, the autobuilder sends anautomated e-mail to the component manager(s) of the affected component(s). An e-mail isalso sent to the person in charge of the build system. The autobuild system ensures thaterroneous changes causing build failures are immediately detected before they affect otherdevelopers.154 Chapter 3

--- Page 165 ---
Key Point
Use an autobuild system to quickly detect changes that break system builds.
With modern PCs and servers, developers are enjoying faster builds than ever before. However,
as software complexity has grown in concert, build times remain an important factor relating todeveloper efﬁciency. Yet there are a couple of methods to reduce the effect of build times ondeveloper productivity.
Key Point
Always ensure a developer has at least two development projects to work on at all times.
When a change is made and a long build is started, there is no excuse for a developer to bewaiting for that build to complete. A developer should always have a secondary project to workon during inevitable breaks, such as those caused by waiting for builds, peer reviews, or themany other reasons why a foreground project is delayed. Ensuring that a developer hasmultiple projects to work on at all times is, ultimately, the responsibility of the developer’smanagement. However, a developer naturally considers downtime waiting for a build tocomplete as a normal mode of operation in which the developer has no choice but to takea break. Therefore, it is important to teach the developer to proactively request more work inthe case he ﬁnds himself blocked on all fronts.
Another technical solution to the waiting build problem is to reduce build times by bringing to
bear the full power of corporate computer horsepower. A typical development site may employmany developers, working on the same or different software projects. There may be dozens, ifnot hundreds, of PCs on the desks of these developers. Sadly, these PCs typically spend themajority of their time idle.
Key Point
Employ distributed builds to maximize computer utilization and improve developer efﬁciency.
Some compiler vendors provide distributed build capability. At a minimum, management
should take advantage of local parallelization of build operations on a single multi-core host
computer. To truly scale, the parallel build system must be able to interrogate computeresources throughout a site, locate machines that are underutilized, and migrate the ﬁlesrequired to accomplish distributed builds to these available resources. Ideally, a distributedSecure Embedded Software Development 155

--- Page 166 ---
build system should not require signiﬁcant conﬁguration. The only required piece of
conﬁguration information for the tool is the knowledge of which machines on the networkshould be candidates to share in the workload. Distributed builds greatly reduce build times,therefore shortening the build-edit-debug cycle that is so crucial to developers’ productivityon a daily basis. Another beneﬁcial side effect of distributed builds is the potential to reducedeveloper capital expenses by better utilizing compute resources throughout a site.
3.6 Independent Expert Validation
After the previous extended discussion on secure development process, we now return to theﬁfth rung in PHASE: independent expert validation.
Key Point
Intrinsic assurance evidence must be evaluated and conﬁrmed by independent experts.
Consumers who read about a vendor’s claim of “certiﬁable” should interpret such hyperboleas “not certiﬁed.” For example, to achieve certiﬁcation to the Evaluated Assurance Levelsabove ﬁve in the United States, a product not only must have all its design documentation,testing, and formal methods painstakingly evaluated by an accredited Common Criteriatesting lab, but also must undergo penetration testing by the NSA’s penetration testing expertswho have complete access to the source code and essentially unlimited resources with whichto craft attack vectors.
In the U.S. aircraft safety domain, the FAA must certify critical aircraft electronics (and their
constituent software) against the RTCA/DO-178B standard. Earlier in this chapter, wedescribed the ﬁve safety levels, A through E, with Level A being the highest, where a failure inthe electronic system may be catastrophic. As mentioned earlier, DO-178B Level A speciﬁesa rigorous assurance process, with many similarities to Common Criteria high-assurancerequirements. In this case, the independent expert evaluators are the designated engineeringrepresentatives (DERs) of the FAA.
Regulatory bodies for safety certiﬁcation of industrial control, automation, and automotive
systems sometimes use the IEC 61508 standard internationally. IEC 61508 also is gainingacceptance in other industries. The railway application-speciﬁc interpretation of IEC 61508 isembodied in the CENELEC EN 50128, “Software for railway control and protection systems,”and EN 50129, “Safety related electronic systems for signaling.” These standards cover theentire software development life cycle and place a strong emphasis on analysis and mitigationof safety hazards, enforcement of a rigorous quality management system, and thoroughveriﬁcation and validation. TU ¨V , based in Germany, is the internationally recognized156 Chapter 3

--- Page 167 ---
certiﬁcation authority for the IEC 61508 and related safety standards. Exida is another ﬁrm that
performs IEC 61508 and related certiﬁcations.
The automotive-speciﬁc interpretation of IEC 61508 is embodied in ISO 26262, whose
adoption in the automotive industry is nascent.
Rail and other industries utilizing IEC 61508 go through rigorous development and testing
requirements. Documentation includes traceability to critical safety requirements for thesystem being developed and its interface to the end product. The certiﬁcation authority auditsthe entire system development process, including witnessing key tests and checkingtraceability of system attributes. Depending on the safety integrity level, the systemarchitecture could be simple or increasingly complex. Suppliers that can start with an operatingsystem that is already CENELEC certiﬁed can save money by not having to system test (andpossibly even unit test, depending on the needed function) the operating system and relatedruntime components when the software itself is part of the safety case.
Software that fulﬁlls all ﬁve PHASE principles (it’s easy to see how the lack of any one of them
can be fatal) can be trusted to manage and protect high-value assets used in security criticalsystems. PHASE does not attempt to rigorously deﬁne a “secure development process” orspeciﬁcally how the principles of least privilege apply to a particular software component orsystem. Interpretations will necessarily vary depending on the situation and level of securityrequired. Incorporation of these principles can also reduce development cost in the long run, byincorporating software development practices that focus on security. Furthermore, PHASE canbe applied selectively and creatively, to improve both security and reliability withoutsacriﬁcing reuse of legacy software.
High-assurance development processes, such as that encouraged by ISO/IEC quality
standards as well as regulatory bodies that govern the use of software in safety and securitysystems, are generally believed to result in higher-reliability software. However, anorganization that follows these processes to the letter is likely to get to market later than anorganization that develops the same product without the overhead of following these qualitystandards. In this chapter, we have presented a set of guidance recommendations, part ofa process that has been proven in use for 30 years at leading security-critical softwaredevelopment organizations, and have argued how these controls can actually increasedeveloper productivity and reduce time to market through the use of methodologies that ﬁndsoftware ﬂaws faster and reduce developer dependencies on each other and on productivity-killing bureaucracy.
3.6.1 Common Criteria
The international standard for evaluating the security of IT systems is ISO/IEC 15408, morecommonly known as the Common Criteria.Secure Embedded Software Development 157

--- Page 168 ---
Key Point
With 26 participating countries, the Common Criteria standard represents an admirable
achievement in obtaining global acceptance and is certainly the most comprehensive interna-
tional security evaluation standardization effort ever conceived.
Under Common Criteria, products are evaluated against Protection Proﬁles that specify the
product family’s security functional requirements and assurance requirements. Functional
requirements are the security policies or protections that a product claims to implement.Assurance requirements are the controls dsuch as conﬁguration management and
testingd that the developer must follow to ensure that the functional requirements are
properly realized.
Key Point
In a Common Criteria protection proﬁle, assurance requirements are collectively tagged with
a security level (called the Evaluated Assurance Level, or EAL) that represents the overall conﬁ-dence that stakeholders can have that the security functional requirements are actually met bya conforming product.
There are protection proﬁles for ﬁrewalls, antivirus applications, operating systems, mobile
devices, and many other forms of technology. Protection proﬁles can be written by anyone, butthe proﬁles themselves must be evaluated, ensuring that products are measured against a well-understood, valid, and accepted standard. In practice, a majority of protection proﬁles havebeen authored by government security organizations such as the NSA.
While the Common Criteria standard provides an excellent, proven technical framework for
specifying and evaluating security for software, hardware, devices, and systems, the standardhas had a disappointing political history. As with many well-intended tools, its potential utilitydoes not always translate into productivity. The Common Criteria standard has suffered frompoor policy decisions and inefﬁcient evaluation processes. For example, a high-assuranceprotection proﬁle, whose requirements were conceived and written in a few months, took sixyears for the U.S. government to evaluate due to interminable tweaking, arguing, andbureaucracy. The ﬁrst product certiﬁcation against this protection proﬁle took four years,despite the fact that the product was ﬁeld proven for a decade prior to the evaluation and nosigniﬁcant vulnerabilities were discovered throughout the evaluation. The inability toefﬁciently perform meaningful high-assurance certiﬁcations has relegated Common Criteria tolow-level certiﬁcations that amount to massive, expensive paperwork exercises, with noconﬁdence that certiﬁed products are secure against determined attackers with even a moderate158 Chapter 3

--- Page 169 ---
level of sophistication. It is hoped government agencies can reform their approach to both what
gets evaluated (avoiding expensive validations that provide no signiﬁcant assurance to users)and how evaluations are performed, and derive what could be tremendous value from thisimportant security approach and standard.
Nevertheless, let’s focus on the important contribution of Common Criteria as a technical
framework for independent expert validation.
Common Criteria assurance levels range from EAL1 to EAL7. The general meanings of the
levels are shown in the following table:
EAL1 Functionally tested
EAL2 Structurally tested
EAL3 Methodically tested and checked
EAL4 Methodically designed, tested, and reviewed
EAL5 Semiformally designed and tested
EAL6 Semiformally veriﬁed design and tested
EAL7 Formally veriﬁed design and tested
General-purpose products, such as Windows, Linux, VMware, Oracle database servers,and Cisco routers, not speciﬁcally designed for high-assurance levels, have been certiﬁedat EAL4 or lower. The Common Criteria state that EAL4 “is the highest level at which itis likely to be economically feasible to retroﬁt an existing product line.”
23This is
sensible because above EAL4, secure-by-design techniques with enhanced formality arerequired.
As one security expert has explained, “Security experts have been saying for years that the
security of the Windows family of products is hopelessly inadequate. Now there is a rigorousgovernment certiﬁcation conﬁrming this.”
24In addition, Windows and other products were
evaluated against protection proﬁles that provide the following disclaimer: “not intended to beapplicable to circumstances in which protection is required against determined attempts byhostile and well funded attackers to breach system security.”
25
Some protection proﬁles essentially ignore assurance level, seeking instead to deﬁne functionalrequirements to facilitate standards and increase interoperability. For example, the NSA hasdeveloped several EAL2 protection proﬁles that provide general guidance for the types ofsecurity controls that certain classes of products should have. One example is the U.S.
Government Protection Proﬁle for General Purpose Operating Systems in a NetworkedEnvironment, which describes requirements for user authentication, discretionary access
control of operating system objects, cryptographic services, and audit services.
26While the
security controls are useful to understand, developers must not interpret the assurance portionof this speciﬁcation as providing any meaningful level of conﬁdence in those securityfunctions.Secure Embedded Software Development 159

--- Page 170 ---
3.6.2 Case Study: Operating System Protection Proﬁles
In addition to the aforementioned, the U.S. government has created several other operating
system-related protection proﬁles. These operating system speciﬁcations have varyingsecurity levels, making them more or less appropriate for certain threat environments.The operating system proﬁles and their applicable threat environments are listed in thefollowing table:
Name Title Security Level Threat Environment
SKPP Separation Kernel in
High Robustness
EnvironmentsEAL6þ/ High
Robustness“management of classiﬁed and other
high-valued information, whose
conﬁdentiality, integrity or releasability
must be protected”27
“presence of both sophisticated threat
agents and high value resources”28
CAPP Controlled Access
Protection ProﬁleEAL4þ “non-hostile and well-managed user
community”29
“inadvertent or casual attempts to breach
the system security”30
“not intended to be applicable to
circumstances in which protection is
required against determined attempts by
hostile and well-funded attackers”31
CCOPP-OS COTS
Compartmentalized
Operations
Protection
ProﬁledOperating
SystemsEAL4 “not expected to adequately protect
against sophisticated attacks”58
“users are highly trusted not to attempt to
maliciously subvert the system or to
maliciously exploit the information stored
thereon”58
LSPP Labeled Security
Protection ProﬁleEAL4þ “non-hostile and well-managed user
community”32
“inadvertent or casual attempts to breach
the system security”33
“not intended to be applicable to
circumstances in which protection is
required against determined attempts by
hostile and well-funded attackers”34
SLOS Single Level
Operating Systems in
Medium Robustness
EnvironmentsEAL4þ “suitable for use in unclassiﬁed
environments”35
Not appropriate for “organization’s most
sensitive/proprietary information” when
exposed to “a publicly accessible
network”36
“likelihood of an attempted compromise
is medium”37
“motivation of the threat agents will be
average”38160 Chapter 3

--- Page 171 ---
As can be seen from this table, only the SKPP is appropriate to protect high-value information
exposed to the threat of sophisticated and determined attackers.
SKPP is the protection proﬁle that was created by the NSA to specify security
requirements for “high-robustness” embedded operating systems. High-robustnessoperating systems control computer systems that manage and protect high-value resourcesin the face of attacks by resourceful adversaries (see the following table). According toDepartment of Defense guidance, high robustness refers to “security services andmechanisms that provide the most stringent protection and rigorous securitycountermeasures.”
43An SKPP-compliant operating system must guarantee that a malicious
application cannot harm (corrupt, deny service to, steal information from, etc.) any otherapplication running on the computer.
The requirements of the SKPP are far more stringent than any other operating system security
standard. The resulting assurance, or conﬁdence, that developers, users, and other stakeholdersare therefore able to derive from an independent SKPP evaluation is extremely high andunprecedented in the world of computer security. SKPP requires an extremely rigorousdevelopment process, formal methods dwhich provide mathematical proof of the
securitydand penetration testing by the NSA’s security experts who have complete access to
the source code. Thus, SKPP assurance requirements represent an excellent example ofa standard for independent expert validation that would provide high levels of securityassurance to embedded systems developers and their customers. While SKPP-evaluatedMLOS Multilevel Operating
Systems in Medium
Robustness
EnvironmentsEAL4þ “suitable for use in unclassiﬁed
environments”39
Not appropriate for “organization’s most
sensitive/proprietary information” when
exposed to “a publicly accessible
network”40
“likelihood of an attempted compromise
is medium”41
“motivation of the threat agents will be
average”42
Attacker threat level
Low threat Medium threat High threat
High Value Low Medium HIGH
Asset Value Medium Value Low Medium Medium
Low Value Low Low LowSecure Embedded Software Development 161

--- Page 172 ---
products are in widespread use, the SKPP itself is no longer being used for new product
evaluations. This is due to the current inability of the U.S. government to perform theseevaluations at a level of cost and schedule efﬁciency that can be justiﬁed in current marketconditions. Nevertheless, security ofﬁcials can still use the SKPP-based evidence in anaccreditation that is performed outside the Common Criteria evaluation program.
Key Point
The following of applicable EAL6 þassurance guidelines, as exempliﬁed in the SKPP, and
obtaining independent evaluation of the associated assurance evidence by expert consultants
would be an excellent approach for embedded systems developers who want to raise the bar ontheir product security.
We will explore these assurance requirements, comparing high- and low-assurance controls, in
more detail in the following sections. Readers are also encouraged to read the SKPP, especiallyits assurance requirements.
Common Criteria development process assurance requirements, with numeric leveling
comparison between SKPP and CAPP (the most widely applied proﬁle in enterprise operatingsystems), are shown in the following table:
Requirement Description SKPP CAPP Notes
ACM_AUT Conﬁguration
management
automation2 0 SKPP requires complete
automation
ACM_CAP Conﬁguration
management
capabilities5 3 SKPP requires advanced
support
ACM_SCP Conﬁguration
management
scope3 1 SKPP CM requires
coverage of development
tools
ADV_ARC Architectural
design10
ADV_FSP Functional
speciﬁcation4 1 SKPP requires formal
speciﬁcation
ADV_HLD High-level
design4 2 SKPP requires semiformal
high-level design
ADV_IMP Implementation
representation3 0 SKPP requires rigorously
deﬁned transformation
from representation to
implementation
ADV_LLD Low-level design 2 0 SKPP requires semiformal
low-level design
ADV_RCR Representation
correspondence3 1 SKPP requires formal
correspondence162 Chapter 3

--- Page 173 ---
ALC_DVS Development
security2 1 SKPP requires
conﬁdentiality and
integrity measures during
development
ALC_FLR Flaw
remediation3 0 SKPP requires systematic
ﬂaw remediation
ALC_LCD Life-cycle
deﬁnition2 0 SKPP requires
a standardized life-cycle
model
ALC_TAT Tools and
techniques3 0 SKPP requires total
system compliance with
implementation
standards
AMA_AMP Assurance
maintenance
plan10
ATE_COV Analysis of test
coverage3 2 SKPP requires complete
test coverage of all
functional requirements
ATE_DPT Depth of testing 3 1 SKPP requires testing
against high-level design,
low-level design, and
implementation
ATE_FUN Functional
testing2 1 SKPP requires ordered
functional testing
ATE_IND Independent
testing3 2 SKPP requires
independent testing of all
requirements (CAPP only
requires sampling)
AVA_VLA Vulnerability
assessment4 1 SKPP requires NSA
penetration testing; others
do not
3.6.2.1 Conﬁguration Management
While CAPP requires the use of a conﬁguration management system and the ability to re-create
the product from the conﬁguration management system, the SKPP includes completeautomation of the CM system, including an ability to automatically identify all aspects of the
product that are affected by the modiﬁcation of any single conﬁguration item. SKPP also
requires that ancillary items, not just product source code, be conﬁguration managed. Forexample, any support ﬁles (e.g., scripts) used for the creation of production images must bekept under CM, and all tools used to generate the executable product must be covered underCM. This is very important due to the potential for tool changes (e.g., compiler) to causeunforeseen changes in the behavior of the product. A case study of this risk was presentedearlier in this chapter.Secure Embedded Software Development 163

--- Page 174 ---
SKPP requirements also cover CM-related plans and documentation, including demonstration
of how CM-related security measures prevent unauthorized changes to the product and howacceptance procedures are followed for change reviews.
3.6.2.2 Functional Speciﬁcation
Functional speciﬁcation refers to the description of the interfaces and behaviors of the product.
CAPP requires only an informal functional speciﬁcation. SKPP goes much further, requiringthat all details of the security functions be covered by the functional speciﬁcation and that thisspeciﬁcation be formal in style. This formality is a critical requirement leveling from EAL7. Inthe case of the Green Hills Software INTEGRITY-178B operating system that wassuccessfully evaluated against SKPP, the behavior of the operating system was formallymodeled in a functional language that lends itself well to automated theorem proving. Thisenabled the veriﬁcation of security policies against the model. The formal deﬁnition of securitypolicies and formal proofs of the policies against its model are not required in the otherprotection proﬁles.
3.6.2.3 Assurance Leveling
To better understand how the assurance levels apply to the assurance requirements families and
their components, let’s look at a sample Common Criteria 2.1 assurance component:ADV_HLD, “High-level Design.” According to Common Criteria, “The high-level designrequirements are intended to provide assurance that the TOE [target of evaluation] provides anarchitecture appropriate to implement the TOE security functional requirements.” Ifa protection proﬁle includes this assurance requirement (most do), then the rigor of therequirement increases with assurance level:
EAL1 No high-level design required
EAL2 ADV_HLD.1: Descriptive high-level design
EAL3 ADV_HLD.2: Security enforcing high-level design
EAL4 ADV_HLD.2: Security enforcing high-level design
EAL5 ADV_HLD.3: Semiformal high-level design
EAL6 ADV_HLD.4: Semiformal high-level explanation
EAL7 ADV_HLD.5: Formal high-level design
You can see from this example that the assurance requirements for a particular component do notnecessarily increase with each corresponding increase in assurance level. Rather, requirementsbecome more stringent when necessary to achieve the conﬁdence goals of a new level.
The ADV_HLD component is further divided into elements that are the individual descriptive
requirements. When requirements increase between assurance levels, elements are added to therequirements inherited from the preceding level. For example, an EAL5 protection proﬁle willinclude the element ADV_HLD.3.9C:164 Chapter 3

--- Page 175 ---
“The high-level design shall describe the separation of the TOE into TSP [TOE Security
Policy]-enforcing and other subsystems. ”
For a ﬁrewall product, this might mean that the high-level design must point out the subsystems
that enforce the trafﬁc ﬁltering rules. For an EAL6 protection proﬁle, this requirement isaugmented to ADV_HLD.4.10C:
“The high-level design shall justify that the identiﬁed means of achieving separation,
including any protection mechanisms, are sufﬁcient to ensure a clear and effective separa-
tion of TSP-enforcing from non-TSP-enforcing functions. ”
In other words, evaluators will expect the vendor to provide high-level design evidence
demonstrating that the trafﬁc-ﬁltering subsystems are protected from corruption, subversion,and so on, by other subsystems.
For an EAL7 protection proﬁle, this requirement is further augmented to ADV_HLD.5.10C,
which is the same as ADV_HLD.4.10C, except that the presentation, or justiﬁcation, must beformal:
“A formal speciﬁcation is written in a notation based upon well-established mathematical
concepts.These mathematical concepts are used to deﬁne the syntax and semantics of the
notation and the proof rules that support logical reasoning. The syntactic and semanticrules supporting a formal notation should deﬁne how to recognize constructs unambigu-ously and determine their meaning. There needs to be evidence that it is impossible to
derive contradictions, and all rules supporting the notation need to be deﬁned or
referenced. ”
44
In the modern electronic world, unsubstantiated and misleading security claims are
commonplace. Potential customers appreciate developers who back up their claims withindependent assessments, whether formalized as in the Common Criteria example, or moreinformal yet rigorous. Some embedded security vendors provide independent consultation,evaluation, and written assessments for their customers; developers can then use the generatedevidence to dramatically enhance their claims for product security. Similarly, usingcomponents that have already been independently validated is another effective approach toimproving security and developers’ claims thereof. This concept applies equally well to safety-critical systems. In the following case study, a more informal independent assessment is
included in the development and deployment process for a high-assurance embedded product.
3.7 Case Study: HAWS dHigh-Assurance Web Server
This case study brings together all the PHASE concepts described in this chapter. In 2008,
Green Hills Software developed a high-assurance web server (HAWS) to host a website
immune to hackers. HAWS was deployed as an application on the high-assurance, security-
certiﬁed INTEGRITYembedded real-time operating system technology. The web server’s leadSecure Embedded Software Development 165

--- Page 176 ---
designer was Dan Hettena, senior operating systems, security, and virtualization architect at
Green Hills Software.
Why did Green Hills decide to write a web server from scratch instead of attempting to lock
down a commercial web server such as Apache? Apache is a tremendously powerful andsuccessful open source web server, hosting a majority of the world’s websites as of the time ofthis writing. The reason for not adopting Apache in this particular case is that the value ofresources to be managed and protected by the web portal was considered extremely high, andthe threat of sophisticated attackers wishing to subvert or deface the web portal was alsoconsidered extremely high. This combination of high-value resources exposed to a high-threatenvironment requires high assurance in security that cannot be feasibly retroﬁtted to softwarenot originally developed to meet this standard.
The Apache code base consists of hundreds of thousands of lines of code developed using
commercial general-purpose processes, not using a high-assurance security standard.Hundreds of software vulnerabilities have been found in Apache over the years, and theprobability of severe, undiscovered vulnerabilities in any snapshot of the software isconsidered extremely high. One example of vulnerability from the U.S. CERT NationalVulnerability Database is as follows:
CVE-2010-0425 :“modules/arch/win32/mod_isapi.c in mod_isapi in the Apache
HTTP Server does not ensure that processing is complete before calling
isapi_unload .which allows remote attackers to execute arbitrary code via
unspecified vectors related to a crafted request. ”
The primary security policies of HAWS are to ensure that the web portal’s content cannot be
maliciously corrupted and that requests from legitimate clients not be denied service by other(malicious) clients. Physical security of the web server’s computer, as well as upstreamnetwork quality of service, is beyond the scope of the HAWS design goals (although theseissues were addressed at the system level).
In addition to these stringent integrity and availability policies, HAWS was designed to handle
many thousands of concurrent connections with good response time performance.
It is important to note that Apache is a perfectly good choice for most systems (and in fact
a port has been done to the same INTEGRITY operating system hosting HAWS), but a higherlevel of security was deemed necessary for this particular application. Let’s run through thePHASE principles in turn, providing examples of how each principle was applied to thedevelopment of HAWS.
3.7.1 Minimal Implementation
In contrast to a typical commercial web server’s hundreds of thousands of lines of code, theHAWS web services engine consists of approximately 300 lines of code. This feat was166 Chapter 3

--- Page 177 ---
accomplished primarily by converting the sophisticated logic of parsing and responding to
HTTP requests into a simple state machine that operates on a pre-loaded, read-only database ofinformation corresponding to a particular instance of the hosted ﬁles serviced by HAWS. Thiscarefully crafted piece of code single-handedly provides HTTP servicing compliant to HTML/1.1 (RFC 2616), the version of HTTP in common worldwide use. The initial website hosted onHAWS was professionally designed and includes sophisticated graphics (Adobe Flash) andJavaScript. The central state machine loop is shown here (code comments and macros elided).Readers are not expected to understand the code; it is provided to demonstrate an example ofminimal implementation:
while (preempt_count > 0) {
uint64_t inst = INST_TABLE(task->pc);
uint32_t nextpc = task->pc + 1;
preempt_count –;
if (((inst >> 59) & 0xf) == 0xf && task->ibuf_off < task->ibuf_len &&
task->ibuf[task->ibuf_off] == (uint8_t)(inst >> 48)) {task->ibuf_off++;task->inst_count++;
} else {
if ((inst >> 61) && task->ibuf_off == task->ibuf_len) {
preempt_count -= 100;if (!re ﬁll_ibuf(task))
return;
}task->inst_count++;
c1 = ((inst >> 61) & 0x1) ?
task->ibuf[task->ibuf_off] : task->GPR((uint8_t)(inst >> 48));
c2 = ((inst >> 61) & 0x1) ?
(uint8_t)(inst >> 48) : ((inst >> 20) & 0xfffff);
cond = (cop & 2) ? ((c1 == c2) ^ (cop&1)) : ((c1 < c2) | (cop&1));
if ((inst >> 62) & (1 << cond))
task->ibuf_off++;
if (cond) {
uint8_t xop8 = (inst >> 40) & 0xff;uint32_t xop20 = (inst >> 0) & 0xfffff;
// Note: switch not used in order to optimize common cases
if (opx == 0) {
nextpc = xop20;
} else if (opx == 1) {
nextpc = task->GPR(xop8);
} else if (opx == 2) {
if (task->ibuf_off != 0)
task->ibuf[ –(task->ibuf_off)] = xop8;
} else if (opx == 3) {
preempt_count -= 400;
if (!continue_send(task, xop20))
return;
} else if (opx == 4) {Secure Embedded Software Development 167

--- Page 178 ---
task->GPR(xop8) = xop20;
} else if (opx == 5) {
task->GPR(xop8) = (ticks - task->start_ticks) & 0xfffff;
} else if (opx == 6) {
free_nettask(task);
return;
}
}
}task->pc = nextpc;
}
It is left as an exercise for readers to browse the open source Apache code, comparing the
preceding state-machine-driven implementation with a traditional input parsing loaded withgobs of special case logic. However, be warned: the Apache software dealing with HTTP-compliant input handling and response consists of thousands of lines of code.
By avoiding common parsing mechanisms, including large network read operations and string
matching, HAWS avoids the kinds of runtime logic that is prone to vulnerability (e.g., buffer
overﬂows).
Finally, the availability features of HAWS are implemented with simple policies instead of
complicated heuristics. Nevertheless, these policies serve their purpose well; HAWS hasproven impervious to sophisticated penetration testing and has not encountered unscheduleddowntime or reported service unavailability since its deployment in 2008. The availabilityfeatures are further described in the following sections.
3.7.2 Component Architecture
The HAWS web services engine runs as an isolated, memory-protected, user mode process.HAWS takes advantage of INTEGRITY’s strict time and space partitioning policies toguarantee that the HAWS component is unable to affect other system components (thenetwork device driver and TCP/IP stack) and vice versa. HAWS does not share addressspace with any other processes or plug-ins and does not dynamically incorporate any code(e.g., DLLs).
Each remote client connection has a strictly enforced maximum lifetime (temporal
componentization), and HAWS rate limits new connection requests in order to prevent DoSattacks and provide quality-of-service assurance to valid connections.
3.7.3 Least Privilege
The HAWS service engine is provided no system resources other than the CPU time andmemory it is allocated and the bidirectional stream of bytes corresponding to HTTP requestsand responses. The service engine has no capability to access any ﬁle system or network device168 Chapter 3

--- Page 179 ---
or to launch other programs. This allocation of resource capabilities is speciﬁed in the system
security policy.
The aforementioned state machine operates on pre-processed data (the ﬁles served) that is
mapped read-only directly into the service engine address space. Read-only access protectsagainst inadvertent corruption of the served data and is a generally good design choice forsecurity.
Other than HTTP, HAWS has no other network ports. In fact, the website content itself cannot
be updated remotely (e.g., via secure FTP) because this was deemed an unnecessary risk.Instead, only a local authorized security administrator with physical access to the web server’scomputer may update the content.
3.7.4 Secure Development Process
HAWS was developed using a rigorous high-assurance process by Green Hills Software’sreal-time operating systems engineering group. The development process includes many ofthe tenets described in this chapter, including exhaustive testing, strict conﬁgurationmanagement, peer review, automated enforcement of a proven coding standard, and formaldesign.
3.7.5 Independent Expert Validation
An independent, leading “white hat” hacking organization performed an analysis andpenetration test of HAWS and one of its hosted websites over the course of anextended period of time. This organization has been providing unbiased, technicallyadvanced, low-level security research since 1998. The security company was unableto ﬁnd any vulnerability, launch any successful denial-of-service attacks, or defacethe site.
While it is not intended to be a drop-in replacement for Apache or other full-featured
commercial web servers, HAWS provides a practical, successful, deployed example of theapplication of PHASE concepts.
3.8 Model-Driven Design
Guy Broadfoot and Philippa Hopcroft author the following section on model-drivendesign (MDD).
Guy Broadfoot is a founder and CTO of Verum Software Technologies. A veteran of the
software development industry, he combines deep academic expertise with solid technicalexperience in developing products and turning around failed software projects. Broadfoot hasSecure Embedded Software Development 169

--- Page 180 ---
been designing and implementing software projects since 1965, and in recent years has
developed a specialized interest in the application of formal methods. In 1986, Broadfootfounded Silverdata, a software company that developed products for marine navigation andhydrographic survey. He sold the product rights to private investors in 1998. He worked asa consultant to Mountside Software Engineering from 1998, where he was responsible forestablishing a rigorous software project planning and ﬁnancial control system. Broadfootgraduated with distinction from the University of Oxford in 2001 with a master’s degree insoftware engineering.
3.8.1 Introduction to MDD
3.8.1.1 Trends Driving Adoption of MDD
This book has often stressed the trend toward increased software and systems complexity that
breeds security vulnerabilities. As the majority of embedded software developers primarily usetraditional programming languages, especially C and C þþ, this chapter has thus far focused
on processes and techniques for improving reliability and thereby reducing security ﬂaws intraditional code bases. However, another approach that has met with increasing success is theuse of model-driven design (MDD).
Key Point
The premise of MDD is to raise the abstraction of software development from the low-level
imperative programming language that is fraught with sharp edges and opportunities to shootone’s self in the foot to a higher-level modeling language that reduces the distance betweendesign and implementation and by doing so reduces the ﬂaws that lead to security and safety
failures.
Modeling also lends itself better to formal proofs of speciﬁcations and security policies than
does traditional programming languages. Indeed, a side beneﬁt of using some MDD platforms(the ones that support formal methods and automatic code generation) is the ability to makeformal arguments regarding the correspondence between speciﬁcation, design, andimplementation, a core challenge in all formal approaches. Therefore, the following discussionof MDD leans toward methods that lend themselves to formal analysis and therefore raise theassurance of quality, safety, and security.
This section introduces the subject of model-driven design as applied to embedded software
development. It addresses the following questions:
What is model-driven design?What beneﬁts
can be expected by applying it to embedded software development?
What types of modeling languages are currently in use?170 Chapter 3

--- Page 181 ---
What types of MDD platforms are there and how do they differ?
What should be considered when choosing the right MDD platform?How does the use of an MDD platform comply with safety standards?
In discussions about MDD and MDD platforms, the term veriﬁcation isoften
 used and tends to
mean different things to different people. According to the IEEE,45the term veriﬁcation is
given the following two deﬁnitions:
1. The process of evaluating a system or component to determine whether the products of
agi
ven development phase satisfy the conditions imposed at the start of that phase.
2. Formal proof of program correctness.
Most MDD vendors assume the ﬁrst deﬁnition for the term veriﬁcation ;throughout this
section, we do the same. In cases in which formal proof of program correctness is intended, weuse the term formal veriﬁcation.
This distinction is important: many MDD platforms offer facilities for veriﬁcation, usually in theform of simulating execution on the development host before testing it on the target system. Testcase generation features of one form or another often support this activity. However, few MDDplatforms offer facilities for formal veriﬁcation to provide proof of correctness of a softwaredesign, and for those that do, this is an important distinguishing capability. Where these facilitiesexist, they offer great beneﬁts, especially in multi-threaded and multi-core designs.
We use the term component to mean some physical hardware or software element of a system
that satisﬁes one or more interfaces. We regard a system as comprising a collection of
components. The term subsystem is a modeling concept deﬁning the grouping of related
components and/or other subsystems. It is a modeling abstraction to assist in the stepwisepartitioning of large and complex systems. The physical realization of a subsystem is alwaysby means of the components that it comprises.
Software development methodologies have historically tended to concentrate on tools that
assist the software developer with system composition, integration, and especially testing.Various component-based technologies, such as CORBA and Microsoft’s COM, DCOM, and.NET have aimed at increasing software development productivity and quality by improvingreuse through component abstraction in those domains where the technologies are applicable.Although increasingly sophisticated development tools, such as optimizing compilers, sourcelanguage debuggers, test generators, and test execution platforms, have long been available tohelp software developers with implementation and testing, this conventional way of developingsoftware is increasingly challenged by:
the relentless pressure to reduce time to market and introduce new products in ever-shortercycles,
frequently leading to hardware and software being developed in parallel and ﬁnal
hardware platforms not available during most of the time the software is under development;Secure Embedded Software Development 171

--- Page 182 ---
the increasing complexity of embedded software, as essential product characteristics and
end-user value are realized by software;the introduction of multi-core technologies, creating an environment in which softwaredesign and coding errors are more likely and conventional testing techniques are lesseffective;the continuing downward pressures on development costs;the trend toward distributed development sites, often in different time zones.
All these challenges must be met while achieving ever-higher quality levels to meet rising userexpectations
and regulatory pressures.
Conventional software development is labor intensive and bounded by human error.According to a recent Venture Development Corporation survey,
46software labor costs
account for more than 50% of the total spent on embedded system development. Of this
spending, according to Ebert and Jones,47typical industry experience ﬁnds up to 40% spent
on testing and rework. It is hard to think of another engineering domain that habitually
spends 40% of its development budget identifying and removing defects that shouldn’t havebeen present in the ﬁrst place.
Historically, organizations have attempted to address some of these issues by means of process
improvement dthat is, introducing practices, procedures, and standards governing every aspect
of speciﬁcation, design, implementation, and testing. While some of this rigor is required inany high-assurance development process, MDD can help to reduce that overhead, enablinghigher assurance while improving developer efﬁciency, an important theme of this chapter. Asdiscussed earlier, decreased efﬁciency due to development process overhead leads rapidly todiminishing return on investment and unsurprisingly to a loss of interest by seniormanagement. Finally, beyond a relatively small threshold of complexity and size ofa component, it is simply infeasible to achieve high-assurance security and safety withtraditional software development techniques. MDD is a tool to address this scalability problem,enabling software developers to be more productive and deliver products more quickly andwith signiﬁcantly fewer defects.
3.8.1.2 What Is MDD?
As noted previously, model-driven design, or MDD, is an emerging paradigm that aims to
improve the software development life cycle, particularly for large and complex softwaresystems, by providing a higher level of abstraction for software design than is currentlypossible with conventional and widely used programming languages. Supported by anappropriate MDD platform, MDD claims to be that technological advance.
MDD is based on the systematic use of models as primary artifacts throughout the software
engineering life cycle. MDD aims to elevate functional models to a central role in thespeciﬁcation, design, integration, and validation of software.172 Chapter 3

--- Page 183 ---
In conventional software development, the deﬁnitive statement of software function is
a mixture of informal functional requirements documents and the program source code, andestablishing the correspondence between the two is often difﬁcult. By raising the abstractionlevel in which speciﬁcations and designs are expressed, MDD aims to replace the speciﬁcationand source code approach with a functional model expressed in an unambiguous, precisemodeling language that can be understood by both the domain experts who determine what theresulting system does and the software developers who implement it. Additionally, codegenerated automatically from the model assures correspondence between speciﬁcation andimplementation.
MDD uses models to represent a system’s elements, the structural relationships between them,
and their behavior and dynamic interactions. Modeling structural relationships supports designexploration and system partitioning; modeling behavior and interactions is essential for beingable to verify designs by verifying models and for code generation. In practice, these last twopoints are the source of most of the beneﬁts claimed for MDD.
For many embedded software developers, code generation in particular seems to be difﬁcult to
accept.
Key Point
Without code generation, much of the advantage of MDD is lost; in reality, deciding to adopt an
MDD approach means accepting automatic code generation from models.
The quality of generated code and its suitability for a particular domain and use is an
important consideration in choosing an MDD platform or even deciding to take the MDDroute at all.
We distinguish between two types of models, namely those that are executable and those that
are both executable and formally veriﬁable. We discuss this issue further in the followingsections. Any MDD platforms offering models that are not executable have little added value
and are therefore ignored.
3.8.1.3 The Potential Beneﬁts of MDD
By raising the abstraction level in which speciﬁcations and designs are expressed and
eliminating informal functional speciﬁcations, MDD has the potential to
1. Eliminate speciﬁcation and design errors early in the development cycle where they are
cheapest and
easiest to rectify.
2. Increase the degree of automation that can be applied to the development process by means
of automatic code generation.Secure Embedded Software Development 173

--- Page 184 ---
3. Facilitate parallel hardware/software design by enabling models to be veriﬁed by simu-
lating execution behavior on development hosts before the target system is available.
4. Reduce the required testing effort by applying automated formal veriﬁcation techniques to
the functional models in combination with simulating execution behavior instead of
relying solely on testing the implemented program code.
Of course, eliminating errors is the primary impetus behind the discussion of MDD fromasecurity
perspective. However, often the most valued beneﬁts of applying MDD to embedded
software development are signiﬁcant reductions in both cost and time to market needed to meetthe required level of functionality and quality.
The use of a suitable modeling language contributes to reducing defects in the resulting
product in two ways. First, it leads to increased precision and reduced ambiguitywhen specifying a system’s required behavior. Second, it reduces the abstraction gap
between the concepts and language of domain experts responsible for specifying the
system’s required behavior and the software developers who must build it. The result isa functional speciﬁcation that clearly and unambiguously speciﬁes the required functionalbehavior and is understandable to all product stakeholders, domain experts, anddevelopers alike.
Automation is increased primarily through automatic code generation, reducing manual
programming effort and thus saving cost and preventing defect injection during programming.Further automation is possible by using simulation and automated test case generation, bothincreasing test coverage and reducing testing costs.
The application of formal veriﬁcation techniques in industry to establish that the functional
behavior of the code generated from a model is as intended has been problematic. There arefew MDD platforms that deliver fully automated veriﬁcation for software, and at the time ofthis writing, only Verum’s Analytical Software Design (ASD) platform can do thisautomatically, without specialized knowledge and for large-scale embedded software systemswith extensive concurrent behavior.
Where such tools are available and applicable, automated veriﬁcation carried out on functional
models can reduce defects to unprecedented levels very quickly and provide signiﬁcant savingsin time and cost; this directly addresses the 40% of development effort currently spent testingand debugging software. We return to this subject later in this section.
3.8.2 Executable Models
Key Point
Models need to be executable; discount any MDD platform where this is not the case.174 Chapter 3

--- Page 185 ---
In addition to being rigorous and precise enough to allow for code generation and test case
generation, executable models can be executed on the development system by means ofsimulation very early in the development life cycle.
Executable models provide the following signiﬁcant beneﬁts:
1. Provide rapid and early feedback on requirements and speciﬁcations and serve to validate
thatthe 
“right” product is being built. This is what most MDD vendors mean when they use
the term verify.
2. Allow functional testing to take place on the development host without requiring access to
software running on the eventual target machine. This is particularly important when the
target hardware and the software are developed in parallel.
Two well-known examples of such platforms are IBM’s Rational Rhapsody products andMentor Graphics 
BridgePoint, both of which use Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML)-based
modeling languages. These are discussed later in more detail.
Executable models are not necessarily formally veriﬁable, and most MDD platforms do
not provide facilities for formally verifying the correctness of the software beingdesigned. These platforms, of course, ensure that the models are well formed in the samesense that a compiler ensures a program conforms to the programming language syntax andgrammar.
3.8.2.1 Formally Veriﬁable Executable ModelsIn addition to being executable, some MDD platforms produce models that are formally
veriﬁable. This means that the MDD platform includes tools for automated formal veriﬁcationbased on mathematical principles.
Simulation, like testing, is a form of sampling. The sample is the set of test cases, or example
scenarios, and the population is the set of all possible execution paths through the software.In practice, for anything other than very small developments, the sample size is statisticallyinsigniﬁcant in comparison to the population size. As E. W. Dijkstra once famously observed,“program testing can be used to show the presence of bugs, but never to show theirabsence!”
48
In contrast, formal veriﬁcation uses mathematical techniques to compute and examineevery possible trace of behavior in a design to establish whether or not a user-deﬁnedset of properties hold under every possible circumstance. If the property set issufﬁciently large and complete in the sense of covering all aspects in the software’sspeciﬁcation, then formal veriﬁcation establishes whether or not a design is correct withrespect to its speciﬁcation. This is analogous to the formal veriﬁcation methods availablein some electronic design automation (EDA) platforms for verifying design intellectual
property.Secure Embedded Software Development 175

--- Page 186 ---
In practice, applying formal veriﬁcation to software designs has proven to be difﬁcult. There
are two major challenges to overcome:
1. The ability to derive the property sets from the speciﬁcations and specify them in some
formal notation
dfor example, temporal logic
2. Scalability
Deriving a complete set of properties to be veriﬁed such that all essential aspects of thesoftware’ s 
speciﬁcation are covered is a difﬁcult and skilled job. Expressing the properties in
a formal mathematical notation such as temporal logic also requires a skill set most embeddedsoftware developers will not have and results in speciﬁcations that are inaccessible to mostproject stakeholders. Therefore, it is generally impossible to review them together with domainexperts and establish that they are a correct interpretation of the software’s speciﬁcation. Evenfor the few MDD platforms that provide some form of formal veriﬁcation, its use is challengingand not widespread.
Key Point
The value of formal veriﬁcation is that it symbolically examines the entire state space of a software
design to determine whether or not the speciﬁed properties hold under all possible inputs.
In practice, this is rarely done; almost all useful software systems are far too complex to
formally verify as a whole. Different MDD platforms use different approaches to theseproblems. Some MDD platforms restrict the class of designs that can be veriﬁed; forexample, SCADE Suite (Esterel Technologies) deals with deterministic, synchronousdesigns. ASD (Verum Software Technologies BV) provides a different approach calledcompositional veriﬁcation whereby an entire system is veriﬁed component by component in
such a way that the proven properties still hold when the components are composed to formthe complete system. This approach allows fully concurrent and asynchronous designs to beformally veriﬁed, both for compliance with the speciﬁed properties and also to show theabsence of typical concurrent and asynchronous design errors such as deadlocks, live locks,and race conditions. Simulation and testing are particularly ineffective at eliminating sucherrors.
Key Point
Formal veriﬁcation should not be seen as an alternative to veriﬁcation based on simulation and
testing; rather, it is complementary.
Formal veriﬁcation with well-designed tools brings a number of signiﬁcant beneﬁts:176 Chapter 3

--- Page 187 ---
1. Enables early feedback on the correctness of component designs without requiring any test
cases to be speciﬁed and before any code is generated. A component can be formally
veriﬁed before any of the components it uses exist.
2. Gives early feedback on defects before code is generated.3. Does not require simulation so no test sets need be prepared.4. Can completely replace or signiﬁcantly reduce the need for component-level (unit)
testing.
5. Reduces integration and validation effort because software enters those phases with very
low defect rates.
The value of these beneﬁts increases rapidly as the scale and complexity of the software grows.For
example, earlier in this chapter, we discussed the beneﬁts of thorough code coverage
testing. A byproduct of formal model veriﬁcation is that complete multiple condition coverage
is accomplished automatically.
3.8.3 Modeling Languages
Models must be expressed in a modeling language with a formally deﬁned grammar and
semantics capable of expressing both static structure and dynamic behavior at an abstractlevel removed from the programming domain. We can divide these languages into twogroups:
Vendor-speciﬁc languages: Languages de
 veloped and promoted by a speciﬁc vendor of
an MDD platform such as MatLab and Simulink from MathWorks, Esterel from EsterelTechnologies, and the ASD language used in Verum Software Technologies’ASD:Suite.Standardized languages: Languages that have been deﬁned by industry groupings of
interested users and MDD platform vendors and are most commonly based on the UniﬁedModeling Language (UML).
In practice, a signiﬁcant difference between the vendor-speciﬁc modeling languages and thevendor
-independent, UML-based languages is, of course, the degree of vendor lock-in that
results from using them. The UML-based languages have the laudable goal of being vendorindependent and, in principle, offering the possibility for models to be exchanged betweenplatforms. Vendor-speciﬁc languages generally do not facilitate model exchange betweenplatforms.
UML-based modeling languages are increasingly being adopted by MDD platforms and other
tools from several major vendors and are standardized. Because of their increasing adoption byMDD platform vendors, UML-based modeling languages are discussed more fully in thefollowing sections. Some vendor-speciﬁc languages are brieﬂy discussed later together withthe MDD platforms that support them.Secure Embedded Software Development 177

--- Page 188 ---
3.8.3.1 The Uniﬁed Modeling Language
The Uniﬁed Modeling Language, or UML, is a general-purpose, graphically based modeling
language arising out of the ﬁeld of object-oriented programming and intended for describingsoftware. The Object Management Group (OMG) standardizes UML, and its speciﬁcations arefreely available for download on the public Internet.
49Increasingly, MDD platforms use
a modeling language derived from or strongly related to UML.
The UML standard prescribes the graphical representation of UML.
Key Point
Because UML is standardized, UML-based MDD platforms tend to present their models in similar
ways, making it easier for users to understand and use MDD platforms from different vendors.
The UML standard also prescribes a machine-readable format in the form of XML ﬁles. The
hope is that this will lead to models being interchangeable between MDD platform vendors.
UML version 2.0 deﬁnes 12 different diagram types together with their graphical elements.
There are 5 structural diagrams types and 7 behavioral diagram types. The structural diagramsrepresent system elements and the static code-level structural relationships between them.These structural diagram types are
Class diagrams: Classes are
 design-time entities representing the basic concepts within
a system and the relationships between them. Classes represent runtime entities calledobjects; each object is an instance of some class. Class diagrams are used to model thestatic relationships and functional partitioning of a system into its components.Package diagrams: Packages are general-purpose containers for grouping related UML
elements, including other packages. They are typically used to organize class diagrams,although they can group just about anything. The meaning of the grouping is model (andmodeler) dependent. Packages play an important role in partitioning and organizingmodels of a large system because they provide a scoping mechanism for names; eachpackage represents a distinct namespace.Composite structure diagrams: When modeling large systems, one often repeats complex
relationships such as models of real-world entities or repeatable design patterns; these arecalled composite structures and represent reusable pieces within a model.Component diagrams: These are similar to class diagrams but instead of dealing with
design concepts, they represent relationships between physical pieces of a system calledcomponents.Deployment diagrams: These diagrams show the physical disposition of a complex system
between different physical processing nodes within a real-world setting.178 Chapter 3

--- Page 189 ---
Behavioral diagrams capture the varieties of interaction and instantaneous states within
a model as it executes over time, tracking how the system will act in a real-world environment,and observing the effects of an operation or event, including its results. The seven behavioraldiagram types are:
Use-case diagrams: These diagrams
 are used to model user/system interactions. They
deﬁne behavior, requirements, and constraints in the form of scripts or scenarios.Interaction diagrams: This type is actually a family of diagrams focusing on interactions
between modeled system elements. The family members are
•Sequence diagrams: These diagrams are by far the most common and the ones with
which most developers are familiar. They show control ﬂow as an ordered sequence ofinteractions between system elements, usually between instances of components.
•Communication diagrams: Communication diagrams tend to emphasize control
dependencies between system elements rather than the sequences in which the inter-actions take place.
•Interaction overview diagrams: These are simpliﬁed interaction diagrams and
something of a cross between a sequence diagram and an activity diagram. Their use isfor summarizing overall control ﬂow through the modeled system.
•Timing diagrams: These diagrams focus on speciﬁc timing behavior of interactions.
They are used to represent the time-based ﬂow of events in the system and formodeling real-time behavior.
State-chart diagrams: There are two ﬂavors of these: one is used to model the evolving
behavior of system elements, typically components, as ﬁnite state machines. The other isused to model the state of a protocol between various system elements.Activity diagrams: These diagrams are used to represent interactions between concurrent
processes. The state behavior of interacting system entities is represented in “swim lanes”and the interactions between them. These diagrams show how the system entities, usuallycomponents, run in parallel with each other and the synchronization points between them.The state behavior shown in the activity diagrams is usually an abstraction of the statebehavior shown in the individual state-charts and represents the externally visible statebehavior between the entities. Synchronization points are represented as “fork” and “join”
operations.
UML has the advantage that it is widely, although by no means universally, known throughout
thesoftware
development community. UML’s graphical orientation makes it attractive to both
users and MDD platform vendors. Also, there are many available resources such as books andtraining courses to help newcomers get started. For examples, readers are directed to the OMGwebsite ( www.omg.org ).
UML has the disadvantage of being weak at describing functional behavior and tending topresent the world in concepts from the object-oriented programming domain. The use of termsSecure Embedded Software Development 179

--- Page 190 ---
and concepts such as classes, objects, aggregation, andinheritance make it difﬁcult for non-
programmers to understand exactly what is being speciﬁed. This goes against one of the major
advantages of an MDD approach dnamely, that the use of more abstract models expressed in
terms speciﬁc to the product being developed helps communication and commonunderstanding between the different stakeholders in a product development environment,including customers, engineers from different disciplines, domain experts, and softwaredevelopers. Software developers unaccustomed to programming in an object-orientedlanguage such as C þþalso tend to ﬁnd the concepts difﬁcult to grasp initially; most embedded
software is still developed in C, and most embedded software developers still tend to comefrom that background.
The difﬁculty of precisely describing required functional behavior has resulted in tool vendors
tending to deﬁne their own variants of UML to overcome this gap.
3.8.3.2 The System Modeling Language
UML provides an extension mechanism called Proﬁles , which enables UML to be customized
and extended to form domain- and/or platform-speciﬁc modeling language variants seen as
members of the UML family. One such UML variant is called the System Modeling Language,or SysML. Originally started as an open source project and now standardized by the OMG,SysML is a general-purpose modeling language for systems engineering. Also graphicallybased, SysML supports speciﬁcation, analysis, design, veriﬁcation, and validation of complexsystems that include hardware and software.
As a modeling language for systems engineering purposes, SysML offers the following
improvements over UML:
1. SysML is less software-centric. It supports the modeling of requirements, structure,
behavior
, and constraints to provide a robust description of a complex hardware/soft-
ware system, its components, and its environment. Compared to UML, SysML does notrely so heavily on object-oriented programming concepts to represent ideas; this makesit easier for non-programmers and engineers from other disciplines to learn andunderstand.
2. SysML is a smaller language than UML. The total number of diagram types is reduced to
nine, seven of which are reused from UML and two of which, requirements diagrams andparameter diagrams, are new to SysML to support requirements management, require-ments tracing, and quantitative analysis.
3. SysML has more ﬂexible and expressive semantics, enabling greater behavioral modeling.
It also includes function-based, message-based, and state-based representations.
4. SysML provides more extensive and ﬂexible support for tabular notations in the form of
allocation tables. The allocation tables provide a support system for partitioning andallocating behavior, structure, and physical and performance constraints between system180 Chapter 3

--- Page 191 ---
elements. This is particularly useful during the architectural design phase when a system is
partitioned into its subsystems and components.
As a consequence, MDD platform vendors are increasingly adopting SysML. A goodintroduction to 
SysML is the book A Practical Guide to SysML.50
3.8.3.3 Executable UML
Another UML variant deﬁned by means of the UML Proﬁle mechanism is called executable
UML, or xtUML. xtUML is a graphical language extended by a non-graphical object actionlanguage for specifying object behavior at a high level of abstraction but with sufﬁcientprecision to enable model execution, simulation, and code generation.
An xtUML model makes use of the diagrams from UML. In some cases, it applies them to
different concepts or has its own version of them. The core set of diagrams is
Domain charts: These are
 essentially UML package diagrams where the packages
represent discrete areas of functionality, called domains, within a system. A domain chartidentiﬁes the domains and the relationships between them.Class diagrams: These diagrams are used to partition domains into design-time entities
representing the basic concepts within a domain and the relationships between them. Thecorresponding runtime entities are objects instantiated from classes.State-chart diagrams: These diagrams are simpliﬁed versions of the UML state-chart
diagrams. Within xtUML, a state machine described by an xtUML state-chart diagramdeﬁnes the behavior of every class.Action speciﬁcation: This is not a diagram as such but rather an entry form via which
object behavior can be speciﬁed using the xtUML object action language.
The remaining UML diagrams such as use-case, sequence, collaboration, and activity diagramscanalso
be reused in a straightforward way.
The xtUML object action language deﬁnes behavior in sufﬁcient detail to enable execution.This language is an OMG-compliant object action language (OAL). It differs froma conventional programming language such as C þþor Java in that it describes behavior at
a higher level, abstracting away speciﬁc programming languages and detailed decisionsabout how the software is organized. The object action language does not make codingdecisions; it makes no statements about tasking structures, distribution, classes, orencapsulation. Instead, the object action language describes only data and behavior,enabling an xtUML model to be deployed in various software environments withoutchange.
Conceptually, each object speciﬁed in an xtUML model executes concurrently and
asynchronously with respect to all others. Each object is either executing a procedure or
waiting for something to trigger its execution. Event sequences are deﬁned per object; there isSecure Embedded Software Development 181

--- Page 192 ---
no concept of global or universal time. All required synchronization between objects must be
explicitly modeled.
The job of mapping this conceptual structure onto a speciﬁc target platform is given to
a model compiler. The model compiler not only generates executable code in the chosenprogramming language, but also provides the runtime mapping onto the target runtimeenvironment in a semantics-preserving way. In principle, and depending on the availability ofsuitable model compilers, a model could be compiled into an implementation designed toexecute on a distributed system using CORBA, on a small-footprint embedded system usingC and targeted for “naked” silicon (without any operating system), or on a complex systemusing C þþor Java targeted for a multi-processor platform using a real-time operating system
such as INTEGRITY or a general-purpose operating system such as Linux or embeddedWindows.
xtUML is an embodiment of the Shlaer-Mellor method of software design on which the Mentor
Graphics BridgePoint platform is based. An excellent introduction to xtUML can be found inExecutable UML, A Foundation for Model-Driven Architecture.
51
3.8.4 Types of MDD Platforms
The practical application of MDD requires the use of an MDD platform: a set of developmenttools and runtime frameworks that include the following:
1. Editing tools for creating and editing models.2.Checking
tools for checking models for completeness and ensuring they are well formed
and meaningful.
3. Tools for verifying the designed behavior, during the speciﬁcation and design project
phases; for example, by simulating runtime execution, automated formal veriﬁcationmethods, or both.
4. Code generators for generating compiler-ready, good-quality, efﬁcient source code
corresponding to the functional behavior in the model. Most MDD platforms provide codegenerators for C and C þþ. Other languages such as Java and Ada are also available from
some vendors.
5. Tools to improve testing efﬁciency; for example, automating test case generation, test
execution, and results analysis.
6. Runtime frameworks that enable the generated code to run properly in a variety of different
execution environments.
Embedded software performs a wide variety of functions in numerous engineering domains.Software ranges
in scale and complexity from simple sensors, I/O interfaces, motion control,
image processing, and supervisory machine control of individual machines at one end of thescale to supervisory control of an entire plant at the other.182 Chapter 3

--- Page 193 ---
Key Point
For MDD to be successfully applied, the MDD platform used must be appropriate not only to the
scale and complexity of the system being developed but also to the engineering domains of the
system.
A problem that arises in complex systems is that multiple engineering domains are
encountered, and no single MDD platform covers them all.
To illustrate this point, in the following section, we use a modern high-speed digital pathology
scanning system made by a leading manufacturer of healthcare and medical imaging devices asan example to show how different parts of a complex system require different approaches orplatforms.
3.8.5 Case Study: A Digital Pathology Scanner
The purpose of the digital pathology scanner in this case study is to make high-deﬁnition, high-resolution color images of human tissue samples and store them in a standard picture archivingand communication system (PACS) for later review by clinical specialists (see Figure 3.6 ). The
image quality must at least equal that of the best optical microscopes and must be suitable forsubsequent computer-aided diagnostic examination. Tissue samples are prepared forexamination and presented to the device on glass microscope slides; each slide can containseveral samples. The slides are placed in racks, and the device has two robot arms with grippersfor moving the slides between the slide racks and the scanning part of the device. Duringscanning, the slides are moved on a precision stage underneath three ﬁxed line scan camerasand their associated optics and illumination sources. The stage moves in three axes; the twohorizontal axes are used for moving the sample under the cameras during scanning, and thevertical axis is used to adjust the height of the samples below the cameras to ensure the best
Figure 3.6:
Digital pathology scanner.Secure Embedded Software Development 183

--- Page 194 ---
focus for every spot on the image. When each image is complete, it is transmitted via a network
connection to the PACS system for storage and later analysis. Because the resulting images arevery large, the device can reach its throughput targets only by performing slide handling,scanning, image processing, and image transmission actions in parallel.
The embedded software controlling such a machine includes
1. Closed-loop motion-control software for controlling the robot arms and the precision
stage; for
example, this includes the software needed for stepper motor proportional-
integral-derivative (PID) controllers.
2. Calibration software for robots, stage, and image acquisition.
3. Image processing software to enable feature extraction and continuous real-time
focusing.
4. Communications software providing remote access to the image servers and implementing
multi-layered protocols deﬁned by the PACS standard.
5. Supervisory machine control software to tie everything together and supervise the
concurrent behavior of robots, image scanning, image processing, data transmission, andexecution of operator commands.
6. A modern graphical user interface (GUI) for the operator.
The software architecture of the sample system is divided into three major layers as follows:
1. Motion Control and Algorithms2.Supervisory
Machine Control
3. Graphical User Interface (GUI)
The Motion Control and Algorithms layer comprises the software implementing the closed-loop control 
algorithms for the motion controllers together with the image processing and auto-
focus algorithms and some hardware abstraction interface code enabling the access tohardware interfaces and signals.
The Supervisory Machine Control layer is a core part of the machine. Built on the Motion
Control and Algorithms layer, the software progressively realizes the necessary abstractionsleading away from the implementation and programming domains toward the end-user andapplication domain and implements a complete but “headless” system. All functionality ispresent, including everything needed to support the GUI to the operator, but excluding the GUIitself.
In the sample system, the GUI layer was implemented in a separate process space for
robustness and to facilitate its development by subcontracting it to a third party withspecialized human interface design skills. It is implemented using Adobe Flash and coupledto the Supervisory Machine Control layer via an off-the-shelf CORBA Object RequestBroker (ORB).184 Chapter 3

--- Page 195 ---
As is typical with complex systems, various technologies are needed to realize the complete
machine, and the software is a mix of custom-built components and off-the-shelf componentssupplied by multiple suppliers.
The chosen MDD approach must be able to support this variety. There is no single MDD
platform suitable for all aspects of all types of embedded software design and implementationand capable of supporting the necessary variety of technologies and mixtures of custom-made,off-the-shelf, and legacy software. The beneﬁts likely to be realized from MDD in practicedepend on the match between the chosen MDD platform and the nature of the software beingdeveloped. Be prepared to mix and match multiple platforms for a complex embedded systemdevelopment. The mix of modeling languages and other development environments used tobuild the digital pathology scanner is shown in Figure 3.7 . Each component and the choice of
modeling system are described further in the following sections.
Furthermore, different MDD platforms require very different skill sets to use them, and these
skills might not be present in your development teams, requiring extensive training or the useof expensive outside specialists. Be aware that some MDD platform vendors have the supply of
Figure 3.7:
Digital pathology scanner subsystems and their associated development/modeling environments.Secure Embedded Software Development 185

--- Page 196 ---
these consulting skills as an essential part of their business model, and some are service
companies disguised as product companies.
3.8.5.1 Algorithm DevelopmentThe digital pathology scanner accepts multiple tissue samples per slide, and each sample must
be scanned and stored separately in its own high-resolution image. Before a high-resolutionscan starts, individual tissue samples must be located as regions of interest on the slide and theirboundaries identiﬁed. This is done by taking a low-resolution image of the entire slide andapplying image-processing algorithms to identify the regions containing the samples.
Development of these image-processing algorithms is performed using a modeling
environment designed for algorithm development. Typically, such platforms provide
1. A (usually) text-based, fourth-generation modeling language designed to model mathe-
matical processes
and algorithms as easily as possible. For example, in the MATLAB
language from The MathWorks Inc., matrices are ﬁrst-order objects, and an extensive set ofmathematical functions and operators works directly on them. An image is represented asa matrix of pixel values containing the image data.
2. Interpretive model execution combined with easy ways of visualizing numerical and image
data in different forms to provide immediate feedback during algorithm development.
3. Multiple facilities for importing data values and a variety of commonly used data and
image formats.
4. The ability to match computational precision in the models with the precision of the target
hardware and facilities for controlling numerical error propagation.
5. Code generators able to generate efﬁcient source code that can be compiled for the target
machine. Interpretive execution is ideal for algorithm development; runtime efﬁciency ofthe algorithms within the ﬁnal product requires optimized code generation.
Two well-known examples of algorithmic development platforms are the MATLAB platformfrom The
MathWorks Inc. and the LabVIEW platform from National Instruments Corp. There
are offerings from other vendors and also some available as open source.
3.8.5.2 Motion Control and Dynamic System ModelingThe digital pathology scanner includes two robot arms with grippers for moving slides into and
out of the device and a three-axis precision stage for moving the slides under the ﬁxed-line scancameras during scanning. The required motion-control algorithms for the closed-loop controlare designed using a dynamic systems modeling platform speciﬁc for this purpose. Typically,such platforms include
1. Graphical user interface for visual modeling with an extensible set of predeﬁned modeling
blocks. Models
are typically developed in the form of dataﬂow block diagrams using an
interactive graphical editor.186 Chapter 3

--- Page 197 ---
2. Domain-speciﬁc modeling aimed at control engineers developing motion-control or other
closed-loop control applications.
3. Interpretive model execution combined with easy ways of visualizing numerical and image
data in different forms to provide immediate feedback during algorithm development.
4. A library of driver software for interfacing with common instruments and I/O devices.
5. Code generators able to generate efﬁcient source code. This is used both for efﬁcient high-
speed simulation during algorithm development and to generate a version deployable onthe target hardware in the ﬁnal product.
Two well-known examples of such platforms are Simulink from The MathWorks Inc. andLabVIEW from
National Instruments Corp.
3.8.5.3 Supervisory Machine Control Layer Software
The supervisory machine control software is typically the place where the more general-
purpose MDD platforms such as the IBM Rational Rhapsody, Mentor Graphics BridgePoint,and Verum Software Technologies ASD would be applied. They are used to partition thesoftware into its various subsystems, components, and component instances; deﬁne componentinterfaces; and specify the functional behavior and detailed design of the components.
The supervisory machine control software in the sample system consists of 350,000 executable
Cþþstatements. Compared with complex medical imaging systems, manufacturing
machines, and telecommunications equipment, this is not an enormous application. Accordingto VDC,
52the average amount of software in complex embedded systems now exceeds one
million executable C language statements.
The pathology scanner was designed to meet strict throughput targets; indeed, this is one of the
unique advantages of the product over its competition. To achieve this performance, thescanner was designed from scratch to overlap and execute concurrently as many differentphases of its operation as possible. The design of the supervisory machine control software
therefore has the following characteristics:
Event driven: Thesystem
 must handle all incoming events in every possible sequence in
which they can occur.
Reactive: The system must always react to incoming events, including those from the
machine operator. There can be no “dead” periods when incoming events are ignored orlost.Asynchronous and concurrent: To meet system throughput targets, the supervisory
machine control software must schedule as many processing phases and mechanicalmovements in parallel as possible.
All these characteristics present formidable challenges for both designers and testing-basedveriﬁcation.Secure Embedded Software Development 187

--- Page 198 ---
Modern trends in chip design are providing increased processing capacity by means of multi-
core solutions rather than single-core solutions with increased clock speeds. Multi-coreplatforms lead to true concurrency with multiple threads executing instruction streamssimultaneously. The sample system is built on such a multi-core platform and was designedfrom scratch to take maximum advantage of it.
Concurrent designs are the most difﬁcult to make and the most difﬁcult to verify by simulation
and testing. In practice, the number of interleaved execution paths of individual threads andtasks is extremely large, and no economically feasible amount of testing can make much ofa statement as to the software correctness or the percentage of execution paths (as opposed toexecutable statements) actually tested. Differences in runtime execution performance betweena simulated platform and the target platform may alter the set of possible interleaved executionpaths. Errors in interleaved execution paths that occur only on the target system may thereforego undetected on the simulated platform. Similar effects occur when adding testinstrumentation to the software under test; errors disappear when debug statements are addedin an attempt to ﬁnd them.
This is exactly the situation in which formal veriﬁcation pays dividends in comparison with
simulation or testing-based veriﬁcation approaches alone.
Figure 3.8:
ASD sequence-based speciﬁcation.188 Chapter 3

--- Page 199 ---
The supervisory machine control software of the pathology scanner was fully developed using
the ASD platform from Verum Software Technologies. This platform was designed fromscratch to incorporate formal veriﬁcation of industrial-scale systems. ASD models are bothexecutable and formally veriﬁable, and this was the principal reason for choosing ASD. Formalveriﬁcation does not suffer from any of the simulation and testing shortcomings describedpreviously; all possible interleaved execution paths are computed and evaluated to verifya software design.
Figure 3.8 shows the sequence-based speciﬁcation (SBS), as shown in the ASD
development environment, of a portion of the supervisor software: the glass path controller,
the part of the scanner that controls the glass slide handling into, out of, and within themachine. As shown in Figure 3.8 , the veriﬁcation step failed because the interface
model (not shown) required the design to send an OnScanningStopped notiﬁcation event
at this point in its execution. The designer accidentally speciﬁed an OnScanningFinished
event instead. The formal veriﬁcation detected this non-compliance between the requiredbehavior speciﬁed in the interface model and the designed behavior speciﬁed in thedesign model.
Figure 3.9:
State ﬂow diagram (partial) for glass path controller.Secure Embedded Software Development 189

--- Page 200 ---
The SBS shows the way that an ASD user speciﬁes the design logic in terms of rules that map
a sequence of responses to every input trigger.
The state ﬂow diagram for the glass path controller is shown in Figure 3.9 . Also shown is the
incorrect OnScanningFinished event.
This state ﬂow diagram is automatically generated by ASD from the SBS input by the user.
The state ﬂow is a convenient visual display for understanding state transitions caused byevents. The arc representing the illegal transition is clearly displayed near the center ofFigure 3.9 .
When formal analysis detects an error, ASD displays the shortest sequence of events that leadto the failure. The sequence diagram elucidating the illegal OnScanningFinished event is
shown in Figure 3.10 .
To get a sense of the code-generation capability of ASD, let’s look at the following codefragment, which is automatically generated C code for the corrected model, corresponding totheStopped transition method for the ExecutingRangeChecks state. This event causes
Figure 3.10:
Sequence diagram showing how design implementation does not match the interface
speciﬁcation.190 Chapter 3

--- Page 201 ---
transition to the Idlestate. It is clear from this code that no other state transition is legal from
theExecutingRangeChecks state.
static void viaExecutingRangeChecks_Stopped(GlassPathController* self)
{
ASDDBG_ENTRYTRACE();switch (self->impl.asd_data.machine){
case GLASSPATHCONTROLLER_MACHINE:
switch (self->impl.asd_data.state){
case GLASSPATHCONTROLLER_SCANNING_EXECUTINGRANGECHECKS_STATE: {
/* Rulecase line number: 209
* The client interrupted the range check by a StopScanning() request.*/
self->impl.asd_data.state = GLASSPATHCONTROLLER_IDLE_STATE;IScanCB_OnScanningStopped(self->IScanCB_intf);self->impl.asd_data.predicate.rangeCheckStatus =
GLASSPATHCONTROLLER_RC_Interrupted_PRED;
}break;default:
asd_illegal(ASD_ILLEGAL_MSG);
break;
}
break;
default:
asd_illegal(ASD_ILLEGAL_MSG);break;
}
ASDDBG_EXITTRACE();
}
3.8.6 Selecting an MDD Platform
3.8.6.1 Examples of Commercial MDD Platforms
3.8.6.1.1 Analytical Software Design Platform
The vendor of Analytical Software Design (ASD) describes the product as a Software Design
Automation (SDA) platform rather than an MDD platform. The reason is that ASD wasconceived with practical formal veriﬁcation at its core. It is the ability to formally verifyindustrial-scale software designs and to make this available to all software developers withoutrequiring specialist knowledge of formal veriﬁcation techniques that the vendor claims is itsdistinguishing feature and considered in a different product category from MDD platforms thatlack this ability. The term SDA was derived from EDA platforms used for hardware design on
the grounds that ASD makes extensive use of formal veriﬁcation techniques in a manneranalogous to EDA platforms’ use of formal veriﬁcation techniques for hardware logic designs.
ASD is a component-based technology for constructing correct and complete industrial-scale
systems from formally veriﬁed components. ASD uses a non-graphical tabular form of theSecure Embedded Software Development 191

--- Page 202 ---
sequence-based speciﬁcation language in which a system response is deﬁned for every possible
sequence of input events.53The ASD:Suite provides the following:
1. A Model Editor used for constructing models of components.2.A
Model Compare tool for comparing different versions of models and showing their
differences.
3. Fully automated formal veriﬁcation of designs against speciﬁcations.4. Code generation in MISRA C, C þþ, and Java.
5. Support for a wide variety of runtime platforms, from “naked” silicon through complex
multi-processor and multi-core systems with a real-time or general-purpose operatingsystem.
The ASD:Suite itself has a client/server architecture; the Model Editor and Model Comparetool are
installed on the user’s desktop while the model veriﬁers and code generators are
provided as a hosted service. Automated formal veriﬁcation is extremely resource intensive,and the hosted service enables users to access this capability without investing in powerfulhardware systems. Another advantage of the hosted service is development security:because the code generators are secured in Verum’s data center, developers need notworry about protecting against the kinds of internal Trojan horse attacks described earlierin this chapter.
ASD recognizes the fundamental distinction between an interface and an implementation and
uses two distinct types of models: an interface model and a design model.
An ASD interface model captures not only the syntax of a component’s interface, such as the
operations and methods, parameter data types, and so on, but also its externally visiblebehavior in the form of a sequence-based speciﬁcation. This externally visible behavior is whatan interface-consuming component can assume to be true of every compliant implementationwhile remaining free of all internal behavior and implementation details. ASD interfacemodels can be made completely independent of the target language.
In contrast, an ASD design model is a speciﬁcation of the internal behavior that deﬁnes
the implementation. All the behavioral source code is generated from the design model; theinterface model is used to generate source code representing the external interface of thecomponent. When the target language is C þþ, for example, the interface models are used to
generate the abstract class declarations, and the design models are used to generate the classimplementations. ASD design models are also independent of the target programminglanguage. All supported languages can be generated from any ASD model.
Earlier, we discussed the difﬁculties of applying formal veriﬁcation to software designs. In
particular, formal veriﬁcation requires specialized skills lacking in most developmentorganizations, and modern system designs are often too complex for the application of formaltechniques.192 Chapter 3

--- Page 203 ---
ASD addresses these issues in two ways: ﬁrst, by including the externally visible behavior as
part of a component’s interface speciﬁcation, and second, by using a technique calledcompositional veriﬁcation in which systems are veriﬁed component by component in sucha way as to ensure that all properties veriﬁed at the component level hold when the componentsform the complete system.
An ASD component design model references a number of interface models. One of these, the
implemented interface model , is the speciﬁcation of all the externally visible functional behavior
the design must implement. The others, used interface models , are the interface models of the
other components being used by the design. Together, these referenced interface models formthe functional speciﬁcation against which the design will be formally veriﬁed for compliance.
The usability and economic issue of deriving property sets needed for design veriﬁcation is
solved because ASD users do not need to specify them by hand; these properties are generatedautomatically by the ASD platform from the set of referenced interface models. ASD usersrequire no specialized knowledge to be able to formally verify software designs.
The scalability issue of applying formal veriﬁcation to complete systems comprising newly
modeled designs, legacy code, and off-the-shelf software components is also handled. Newdesigns modeled with ASD have both an ASD interface model and an ASD design model, asmentioned previously. Legacy code or off-the-shelf components will not have an ASD designmodel; instead, the user must analyze the components’ conventional speciﬁcations and thenconstruct ASD interface models representing those components.
ASD’s veriﬁcation is fully automated. A component is veriﬁed by submitting for veriﬁcation
its ASD design model together with its set of referenced ASD interface models. The ASDplatform translates the ASD models into mathematical models in a process algebra calledCommunicating Sequential Processes (CSP).
54The resulting CSP models are exhaustively
examined by a ﬁnite-state model-checking engine running on the vendor’s server farm.
ASD currently supports two execution models: namely, the standard execution model (SEM)
and the single-threaded execution model (STM). In both execution models, every ASDcomponent instance behaves as a Hoare Monitor and automatically provides the necessarymutual exclusion and synchronization.
55In the standard execution model, all components
execute concurrently and asynchronously. However, ASD recognizes that most interactionsbetween components in practical designs are synchronous in nature, ultimately beingimplemented on the target environment by synchronous procedure calls. Instead of requiringthe user to model the synchronization explicitly for this most common case, ASD does thisautomatically. The user has only to model explicitly those synchronizations necessary tocoordinate asynchronous interactions between concurrently executing components.
The single-threaded execution model, in contrast, assumes only one thread of control
through an entire stack of single-threaded components. Furthermore, this has to beSecure Embedded Software Development 193

--- Page 204 ---
guaranteed by the environment, and the generated code includes no mechanisms for
ensuring mutual exclusion at runtime. This model was designed for simple, deeplyembedded applications executing on target platforms with highly constrained resources.The model is also widely used in the telecommunications domain when manythousands or millions of component instances are required to support active callsthrough a switching node.
Components of both executable models can be mixed in a single subsystem; this is
particularly useful when interfacing with GUI frameworks. Typically, modern GUIframeworks are themselves single threaded and driven by a so-called message pump:they require that actions synchronously invoked by the framework complete theirprocessing on the calling thread. Being able to mix components with different execution
models enables, for example, a single threaded set of components to interface directlywith a GUI framework while invoking standard model components for carrying out theactions requested via the GUI either synchronously or asynchronously, as called for bythe design.
3.8.6.1.2 IBM Rational Rhapsody
Rhapsody is a UML/SysML-based visual modeling platform aimed at embeddedsoftware developers. It is available in Eclipse and Microsoft Windows versions.Rhapsody is aimed at the complete developm ent life cycle, from requirements through to
deployment. Rhapsody is available in a number of editions, each being targeted ata speciﬁc community of users. Depending on the edition chosen, Rhapsody’s featuresinclude
1. Integrated requirements and modeling environment using industry-standard SysML or
UML diagrams.
2.
Full life-cycle traceability and analysis from requirements to design. Requirements can be
imported from external sources such as DOORS, IBM Rational Requisite Pro, MicrosoftWord, and Excel. Requirements can also be managed directly from within Rhapsody andare fully traceable to use cases and software components. It provides
•Static model checking analysis to improve design consistency.
•Support for graphical difference and merging capabilities.
•Visualization of architecture and design with industry-standard UML.
•Generation of C, C þþ, or Java code frames.
•Full behavioral code generation for C, C þþ, Java, and Ada.
Documentation can be generated from the models, reducing the compliance effort required forsafety critical
software.
Rhapsody models are executable, and veriﬁcation is by means of simulation and testing.Rhapsody does not provide formal veriﬁcation of design correctness.194 Chapter 3

--- Page 205 ---
3.8.6.1.3 Mentor Graphics BridgePoint
Mentor Graphics BridgePoint is another UML-based visual modeling platform aimed at
embedded software developers with particular emphasis on real-time systems. BridgePoint isbased on the Shlaer-Mellor method and uses executable UML (xtUML) as its modelinglanguage. BridgePoint is aimed at all development phases, from architecture through todeployment.
In addition to the core xtUML language elements mentioned earlier (domain charts, class
diagrams, state machine diagrams, and action speciﬁcations), BridgePoint also supports use-case diagrams, sequence diagrams, communication diagrams, and activity diagrams. Featuresinclude
1. Static model checking analysis, which helps design consistency during model construc-
tion. As
model elements change, action speciﬁcations are automatically updated as
necessary to keep the models consistent.
2. The ability to visualize architecture and design with industry-standard UML.3. Full behavioral code generation for C and C þþ.
4. Model compilers for translating xtUML to C or C þþ.
BridgePoint models are platform-independent models (PIMs) that can be directly executed inxtUML without
requiring code generation or translation from xtUML. Direct execution
supports veriﬁcation during the design phase.
3.8.6.1.4 SCADE Suite
SCADE (Safety Critical Application Development Environment) is both a language and a toolset speciﬁcally aimed at safety-critical applications. SCADE resulted from a joint effort byAirbus, Schneider Electric, and Verilog (a former French startup company, not the hardwaredescription language of the same name). SCADE is based on the theory of synchronouslanguages for deterministic real-time applications and in particular on the Lustre and Esterellanguages.
56,57
SCADE implements a synchronous, cycle-based execution model, the common sampling/actuating model from control engineering, by executing a continuous loop alternating betweenreading input sensors and executing application actions. On each cycle, input sensors are read,and cycle outputs are computed and fed back to the environment. SCADE is used to developthe application logic within this continuous control loop.
The SCADE Suite from Esterel Technologies is a member of the product family addressing all
phases of software development for control software. Its features include
1. Visual modeling of both data ﬂow and control ﬂow using a combination of data ﬂow block
diagrams and
state machine diagrams.Secure Embedded Software Development 195

--- Page 206 ---
2. Visual modeling of GUI interfaces.
3. C code generators producing small-footprint code compliance with a number of safety
standards, including DO-178B, IEC 61508, EN 50128, and IEC 60880.
4. Ada code generators.5. Customizable adapters to enable the generated code to run on any target environment, from
naked silicon to those with an onboard RTOS. INTEGRITY from Green Hills Software,VxWorks from Wind River, and PikeOS from Sysgo are among those directly supported bythe suite.
6. Veriﬁcation based on simulation.7. Formal veriﬁcation of functional behavior and timing properties.
Other members of the SCADE family include SCADE System, for the model-driven design ofcritical system
architectures, and SCADE Display, providing a visual modeling environment
for developing critical displays and graphical human/machine interfaces for safety-critical andmission-critical systems.
The SCADE timing veriﬁer statically examines the compiled and linked code of a subsystem or
a complete system. Users specify information about the target CPU such as clock rate, cachebehavior, and pipeline structure. In addition, the tool requires that the upper bound of thenumber of iterations of every loop is known and speciﬁed. This loop information can beextracted automatically from SCADE Suite-generated code but has to be speciﬁed manuallyfor legacy code or third-party code modules.
The approach taken by SCADE Suite is possible because of the sequential, deterministic
behavior of the systems it produces. Developers must investigate whether or not this approachscales sufﬁciently and is otherwise feasible for a particular application.
Because of its safety and mission-critical embedded systems application focus, the vendor has
prequaliﬁed the platform and, in particular, its code generators for compliance with a numberof safety standards, including IEC 61508 and its derivative standards ISO 26262, EN/ISO13849, and IEC 60324.
3.8.6.2 MDD Platform Choice Is Strategic
Adopting an MDD approach to software development is a decision with many consequences,
not all of which are apparent. Some of the most important considerations are discussed in thefollowing sections.
In the EDA world, the choice of EDA platform has turned out in practice to be a strategic
decision. It is unusual for users to switch vendors and platforms because transition costs arevery high. Costs include a large investment in retraining users and porting existing intellectualproperty into the new modeling environment.196 Chapter 3

--- Page 207 ---
While some MDD platforms claim otherwise, the same reality applies to MDD. With the
passing of time, much of an organization’s software intellectual property will exist in the formof models speciﬁc to one MDD platform and thus one vendor.
Key Point
While portable models that can be seamlessly imported with full semantics preservation between
vendors’ platforms are desirable, this ability does not yet exist in practice; every MDD platformhas many unstated assumptions as to the precise meaning and interpretation of its models, andthese assumptions are built into the code generators, simulators, test case generators, formal
veriﬁers, and supporting runtime platforms.
Even for MDD platforms implementing the UML and/or SysML standards, the problem
remains. All UML-based languages are designed for extensibility, with many semanticvariation points. Every MDD platform vendor is likely to have made vendor-speciﬁc semanticextensions.
3.8.6.3 SkillsSoftware engineers will need training in the use of an MDD platform, and the amount of
training varies between platforms. While an important consideration, training is not the mostimportant when considering the skills required.
As noted earlier, model-driven design is fundamentally about working at higher levels of
abstraction than is usual or possible with conventional software development practices.Consequently, model-driven software development values higher-level software architectureand design skills above programming skills. Many experienced and highly skilledprogrammers ﬁnd it difﬁcult to develop software architectures and designs at the level ofabstraction required for successful modeling. The larger and more complex the system beingdesigned, the more serious this problem becomes.
It is therefore important to assess the level of these skills within the existing organization as
part of the decision process. Bridging the gap between the skill set required and those skillsavailable will require training followed by mentoring and coaching. MDD is sometimesadopted by organizations as an attempt to overcome a deﬁciency in design skill, but thisimpetus rarely translates into success. Instead of overcoming the skills deﬁcit, it merely servesto highlight them.
3.8.6.4 Impact on Existing Work FlowsExperience has shown MDD to be compatible with incremental and agile methods of
development.Secure Embedded Software Development 197

--- Page 208 ---
Key Point
Compared to conventional methods, MDD enables veriﬁcation to start earlier, as soon as models
are completed; veriﬁcation is not dependent on handwritten code or test cases. To beneﬁt from
this opportunity, however, an organization must establish requirements much earlier in the
development life cycle and to a greater degree of precision than is usually the case withconventional software development.
Some MDD platforms, such as Rhapsody, BridgePoint, and ASD, are intended for the
development of complete, complex software systems and implement an “end-to-end”approach for all phases of the software development life cycle, from requirements tomaintenance after deployment. A settled architecture that cleanly partitions the system intocoherent components is a prerequisite for making successful functional models. ManyMDD platforms require this process to be followed, and, especially for organizations ata lower maturity level (e.g., CMMI level two or below), the impact of this process can besevere.
When considering MDD as a way of working and selecting an MDD platform, developers must
understand what the MDD platforms under consideration require from an organization andhow their use will change the way the organization currently operates.
3.8.6.5 Interfacing with Legacy Code and Off-the-Shelf SoftwareMost complex systems contain a combination of software components that are newly
developed, reused from legacy code, and supplied by third parties. Legacy code and third-partycomponents are often not developed using an MDD platform, and no models of thosecomponents exist. In addition, as in the pathology scanner case study, there will be a layer ofhandwritten software implementing hardware abstraction interfaces, device drivers, and theunderlying operating system.
Key Point
When MDD-designed and -generated code is mixed with handwritten code, there are two
principal issues to consider: ﬁrst, how can the MDD models be veriﬁed when their correct runtime
execution depends on behavior in unmodeled handwritten code? Second, how will the model-generated code interface with the handwritten code at runtime?
The ﬁrst issue is a big one; much of the beneﬁt from MDD comes from being able to verify the
design models without needing the target platform (thus reducing the 40% of developmentmoney spent on test and integration). For this economy to be realized, the externally visiblefunctional behavior of the unmodeled code must be captured and speciﬁed in some way,198 Chapter 3

--- Page 209 ---
whether the veriﬁcation is achieved informally by simulation or by means of formal
veriﬁcation.
MDD platforms address this problem differently. Some platforms allow unmodeled
components to be invoked directly from the model during veriﬁcation. Another commonapproach is to provide a language in which the functional behavior of the unmodeled code canbe speciﬁed at a high level of abstraction. For example, the ASD platform addresses thisproblem by requiring ASD interface models representing the functional behavior of theunmodeled code.
Regardless of approach taken, the problem of ensuring the correspondence of these models
with the handwritten code remains with the user. Veriﬁcation based on the models is valid onlyto the extent that the legacy code or third-party components behave according to their models.
The second issue concerns the conventions assumed by the MDD platform when generating
code and the assumptions the platform makes about memory models an d runtime execution
process and thread structure. In many cases, considerable effort can be expendedhandwriting code wrappers to transfer control and data between generated and handwrittencode.
3.8.6.6 Code GenerationCode generation has yet to gain widespread acceptance in the embedded software world.
However, as mentioned earlier, much of the value of MDD is lost unless code is generateddirectly from the models. The MDD platform vendor takes responsibility for ensuring that thegenerated code executes exactly as modeled. If code is handwritten using the veriﬁed models asa speciﬁcation, or the generated code is modiﬁed, then all bets are off. Having veriﬁed themodels, the developer will have to re-verify the handwritten or modiﬁed code by conventionaltesting, nullifying the advantages of MDD.
Key Point
When an organization chooses an MDD platform, the efﬁciency, portability, and compliance
characteristics of the generated code are of vital importance, especially in the embedded domain.
Developers and managers must examine sample code generated from realistic models to be
satisﬁed with at least the following:
Memory footprint: Isthe generated code small enough to ﬁt in the target system? Is the
memory footprint properly distributed between ROM and RAM memory (if applicable)?In the case of severely resource-constrained systems, these issues can be showstoppers.Memory allocation model: Some target environments, such as those compliant with the
MISRA standards discussed earlier in this chapter, require all resources to be allocatedSecure Embedded Software Development 199

--- Page 210 ---
before execution starts and prohibit dynamic memory allocation; consequently, recursion
and the language-speciﬁc equivalents of malloc () and free() are prohibited. Does the MDD
platform provide a code generation option for complying with these language subsets (ifapplicable)?Merging of handwritten code/legacy code: Some code generators use proprietary calling
conventions in the generated code. To what extent are these conventions compatible withthe system’s legacy code? And if incompatible, what is the solution to make the generatedcode compatible? If wrappers are needed, are these completely handwritten (creating extraeffort and maintenance as well as potential fault injection risk), or does the code generatorprovide some assistance with this process?Threading and runtime execution model: Most MDD platforms have particular execution
and threading models that cannot be modiﬁed by the developer. For example, someplatforms have a strict message-passing model to describe interactions between compo-
nents and assume complete concurrency, with one thread being allocated to each
component. The platform supplies a means by which these generated threads are mappedonto actual operating system threads at runtime. There are domains in which this threadingmodel simply does not work dfor example, in the telecommunications domain where
very large numbers of component instances exist and there may simply be insufﬁcientsystem resources to support this number of threads. Designers need to understand theexecution models of the candidate MDD platforms and determine if they are sufﬁcient forthe target environment.
3.8.6.7 Runtime Execution Speed
Unless the
target is deeply embedded or so performance constrained that developers must
regularly count cycles, execution speed is one potential problem that most generated code does
not have. Experience has shown that in all but the most performance-constrained targetenvironments, automatically generated code performance is adequate.
For performance-critical applications, some platforms offer facilities for verifying timing
properties. For example, the SCADE Suite has features for computing and verifying worst-caseexecution time for sequential applications by statically examining the compiled and linkedexecutable of a subsystem or a complete system.
3.8.6.8 Runtime System RequirementsDifferent applications have varying target platform requirements that must be supported by the
chosen MDD platform. For example:
1. If the target system is a deeply embedded “naked” silicon (without an operating system)
with limited
resources, will the generated code execute in the target environment “out of
the box,” or will a simple task scheduler and interrupt service routines need to be developedby hand?200 Chapter 3

--- Page 211 ---
2. If the target system has an operating system, does the generated code support it? If not, how
can the generated code be ported to the target environment? Is there an operating system
abstraction layer that needs to be ported, or must the generated code be modiﬁed? If so, isthere a development kit provided by the platform vendor for this with clear speciﬁcationsand compliance tests?
3. If the application is a hard real-time application (i.e., one in which timing constraints are
correctness properties), is the generated code and runtime execution model sufﬁcientlydeterministic with respect to timing behavior? Does the system allow interrupts to beserviced quickly enough?
3.8.7 Using MDD in Safety- and Security-Critical Systems
The use of MDD platforms in safety-, security-, and mission-critical domains such asaerospace, military applications, rail transportation, and automotive is gradually increasing.The standards governing software in such domains increasingly recognize that unit testing canbe reduced if an MDD platform is used that provides sufﬁcient veriﬁcation facilities on themodel itself.
The detailed requirements governing the use of tools such as MDD platforms differ in detail
from one standard to the next. Broadly speaking, the standards follow the same generalapproach:
• The standards distinguish between the operational embedded software shipped as part of
theproduct
from the tools used to make that software. Certiﬁcation usually applies to the
operational software, not to the tools. When tools are covered in a certiﬁcation, theirrequirements are quite different and, in general, not as rigorous.
• The various standards for safety- and security-critical software dfor example, IEC 61508,
EN 50128, ISO 26262, and ISO 15408 (Common Criteria) doften require the tool users to
undertake an assessment of the tool to categorize it according to whether or not the toolitself can introduce errors into the operational embedded software and to perform anassessment of the tool against the applicable criteria in the standard to qualify the tool forsafe and secure use.
• All users of software development tools must qualify them to establish that they comply
with the applicable standards. The responsibility for this falls on the tool user and not onthe tool vendor. At the minimum, the user is required to ensure that a hazardous operationanalysis is performed and a Safe Use Guide is written, specifying, for example, the checksthat users must perform on the resulting output (e.g., generated code) and tool features tobe avoided because they are considered hazardous. Also, known errors in the version of theplatform being used must be identiﬁed together with practices for avoiding them.
• The user must establish that the MDD platform vendor’s software development practices
and organization comply with the applicable standards. For example, EN 50182 requiresSecure Embedded Software Development 201

--- Page 212 ---
that the MDD platform manufacturer have a named person external to the development
team who is responsible for ensuring each release conforms to requirements and remainsqualiﬁed. This person must report to the company’s most senior management and musthave the authority to stop a release. In some European Union jurisdictions, this person hasa legal responsibility.
When considering MDD platforms for use in a safety-, security-, or mission-critical domain, anorganization
should consider at least the following:
1. Is the MDD platform already in use within a domain governed by the same or similar
standards and
regulations as the organization’s and/or project’s domain?
2. Has the platform vendor already conducted a qualiﬁcation assessment supervised by
a recognized external certiﬁcation organization? Undertaking the assessment necessary toqualify an MDD platform for safe use is a time-consuming and expensive process;
prequaliﬁcation by the MDD vendor signiﬁcantly reduces the costs of qualiﬁcation to the
user. Prequaliﬁcation also provides evidence that the expensive and time-consumingqualiﬁcation assessment is likely to be successful and shows vendor commitment to, andknowledge of, the development organization’s safety- or security-critical domain.
3. What form of veriﬁcation does the MDD platform offer? Especially in the safety- and
security-critical areas, formal veriﬁcation is particularly valuable.
4. To what extent can the MDD platform’s veriﬁcation be used to eliminate or reduce the
amount of conventional unit testing? Can the MDD platform also simplify and reduceintegration testing and result in savings with respect to end-to-end validation?
5. Does the generated code comply with the applicable standards and regulations? For
example, in the automotive domain, generated code must be compliant with theMISRA C standard.
6. Does the platform assist in producing the embedded software documentation required by
the applicable standards?
Because of its potential development cost and time efﬁciencies and ability to reduce theoccurrence of
software design ﬂaws, model-driven design is an important software
development technique worth considering for embedded systems that have stringent safety,security, and/or reliability requirements. Deciding on the most appropriate MDD platform fora particular component and for the overall system requires that engineers and managersunderstand the core technical advantages and disadvantages of available solutions. Consultyour embedded software vendors for further advice and evaluation.
3.9 Key Points
1. Software assurance refers to the level of conﬁdence that the software end user and other
relevant stakeholders (e.g., certiﬁers) have that the security policies and functionsclaimed by that software are actually fulﬁlled.202 Chapter 3

--- Page 213 ---
2. PHASE dPrinciples of High-Assurance Software Engineering dprescribes a set of ﬁve
principles to be used in the creation of ultra-reliable software and systems: minimal
implementation, component architecture, least privilege, secure development process,and independent expert validation.
3. An important software robustness principle is to compose large software systems from
small components, each of which is easily maintained by, ideally, a single engineer whounderstands every single line of code.
4. An important corollary to the component architecture principle is that safety and/or
security-enforcing functionality should be placed into separate components so that crit-ical operations are protected from compromise by non-critical portions of the system.
5. Componentization provides many beneﬁts, including improved testability, auditability,
data isolation, and damage limitation.
6. Ensure that no single software partition is larger than a single developer can fully
comprehend.
7. Ensure all developers know who the component managers are.8. If possible, use an operating system that employs true application partitioning.9. Contrary to popular belief, designers should strive for a one-to-one ratio between threads
and processes.
10. Components must be given access to only those resources (e.g., communication path-
ways, I/O devices, system services, information) that are absolutely required.
11. For critical safety- and security-enforcing components, the software development process
must meet a much higher level of assurance than is used for general-purpose components.
12. An extremely important aspect of maintaining secure software over the long term is to
utilize an effective change management regimen.
13. Use asynchronous code reviews with e-mail correspondence or carefully controlled live
meetings.
14. Use the conﬁguration management system to automate enforcement of peer reviews for
every modiﬁcation to critical code.
15. Apply a level of process rigor, including code reviews and other controls, that is
commensurate with the criticality level of the component.
16. By making security a part of peer reviews, management will create a culture of security
focus throughout the development team.
17. Developers and users require assured bit provenance: conﬁdence that every single binary
bit of production software originates from its corresponding known-good version ofsource code.
18. Develop and deploy a coding standard that governs software development of all critical
components.
19. Maximize the use of automated veriﬁcation of the coding standard; minimize the use of
manually veriﬁed coding rules.Secure Embedded Software Development 203

--- Page 214 ---
20. Prohibit compiler warnings.
21. Take advantage of the compiler’s strictest language settings for security and
reliability.
22. The goal of Embedded C þþis to provide embedded systems developers who come from
a C language background with a programming language upgrade that brings the majorobject-oriented beneﬁts of C þþwithout some of its risky baggage.
23. Use automated tools to enforce a complexity metric maximum and ensure that this
maximum is meaningful (such as a McCabe value of 20).
24. The best coverage for software ﬂaw detection via static analysis requires multiple tools
from multiple vendors to be used in concert.
25. For organizations new to static analyzers, MISRA, and other automated code-quality
enforcement tools discussed in this chapter, managers and their development teams needto prepare themselves for what may be a painful initial deployment.
26. Management must allow for exceptions to coding standard rules for speciﬁc portions of
critical software in which the risk and cost of retroﬁt clearly exceed the beneﬁt.
27. It is absolutely critical that management decide the course, invest in the initial retroﬁt cost
and schedule, and then stay the course until a high-quality coding standard is ﬁrmlyentrenched into the development system and indoctrinated throughout the engineeringorganization.
28. Management should carefully limit the number of coding standard controls that must be
manually enforced; if that number is too large, peer reviews will either become overlyinefﬁcient or enforcement of those rules will become lax and ultimately irrelevant.
29. A secure development process should employ dynamic code analysis in addition to static
code analysis.
30. Whenever possible, a static analysis tool should be used to check for the largest potential
runtime stack memory requirements for a program or for all threads in a multi-threadedprogram.
31. A comprehensive test regimen, including functional, regression, performance, and
coverage testing, is well known to be one of the best mechanisms to assure that softwareis reliable and secure.
32. We strongly recommend the use of MC/DC coverage testing for the most critical
components of an embedded system dfor example, the operating system kernel, network
security protocols, and cryptographic components.
33. A lack of complete test coverage almost always points to a lack of other important
validation (e.g., functional testing), design ﬂaws, or simply latent code that has unknownand potentially security-relevant impact.
34. The testing system should be running 24x7.35. The testing system should run on actively developed products as well as currently
shipping products.204 Chapter 3

--- Page 215 ---
36. The testing system should be able to effectively test a software project in less than one
night.
37. It should be trivial to determine when a test run has succeeded or failed; a failed test
should be trivial to reproduce.
38. Use an autobuild system to quickly detect changes that break system builds.
39. Always ensure a developer has at least two development projects to work on at all times.40. Employ distributed builds to maximize computer utilization and improve developer
efﬁciency.
41. Intrinsic assurance evidence must be evaluated and conﬁrmed by independent experts.42. With 26 participating countries, the Common Criteria standard represents an admirable
achievement in obtaining global acceptance and certainly the most comprehensiveinternational security evaluation standardization effort ever conceived.
43. In a Common Criteria protection proﬁle, assurance requirements are collectively tagged
with a security level (called the Evaluated Assurance Level, or EAL) that represents theoverall conﬁdence that stakeholders can have that the security functional requirementsare actually met by a conforming product.
44. Following applicable EAL6þ assurance guidelines, as exempliﬁed in the SKPP, and
obtaining independent evaluation of the associated assurance evidence by expertconsultants would be an excellent approach for embedded systems developers who wantto raise the bar on their product security.
45. Independent expert validation is a critical requirement for any embedded systems
organization that wishes to improve product security and make justiﬁable claims aboutthat security.
46. The premise of MDD is to raise the abstraction of software development from the low-
level imperative programming language that is fraught with sharp edges and opportu-nities to shoot one’s self in the foot to a higher-level modeling language that reduces thedistance between design and implementation and by doing so reduces the ﬂaws that leadto security and safety failures.
47. Without code generation, much of the advantage of MDD is lost; in reality, deciding to
adopt an MDD approach means accepting automatic code generation from models.
48. Models need to be executable; discount any MDD platform where this is not the case.49. The value of formal veriﬁcation is that it symbolically examines the entire state space of
a software design to determine whether or not the speciﬁed properties hold under allpossible inputs.
50. Formal veriﬁcation should not be seen as an alternative to veriﬁcation based on simu-
lation and testing; rather, it is complementary.
51. Because UML is standardized, UML-based MDD platforms tend to present their models
in very similar ways, making it easier for users to understand and use MDD platformsfrom different vendors.Secure Embedded Software Development 205

--- Page 216 ---
52. For MDD to be successfully applied, the MDD platform used must be appropriate not
only to the scale and complexity of the system being developed, but also to the engi-
neering domains of the system.
53. While portable models that can be seamlessly imported with full semantics preservation
between vendors’ platforms are desirable, this ability does not yet exist in practice; everyMDD platform has many unstated assumptions as to the precise meaning and interpre-tation of its models, and these assumptions are built into the code generators, simulators,test case generators, formal veriﬁers, and supporting runtime platforms.
54. Compared to conventional methods, MDD enables veriﬁcation to start earlier, as soon as
models are completed; veriﬁcation is not dependent on handwritten code or test cases. Tobeneﬁt from this opportunity, however, an organization must establish requirements muchearlier in the development life cycle and to a greater degree of precision than is usuallythe case with conventional software development.
55. When MDD-designed and -generated code is mixed with handwritten code, there are two
principal issues to consider: ﬁrst, how can the MDD models be veriﬁed when their correctruntime execution depends on behavior in unmodeled handwritten code? Second, howwill the model-generated code interface with the handwritten code at runtime?
56. When an organization chooses an MDD platform, the efﬁciency, portability, and
compliance characteristics of the generated code are of vital importance, especially in theembedded domain.
3.10 Bibliography and Notes
1. ILTISd Railway Trafﬁc Control. Siemens Switzerland Transportation Systems. http://www.aonix.com/pdf/
CaseStudy_ILTIS.pdf .
2.http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_programming_languages .
3. DO-178B. Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certiﬁcation .R T C A ,I n c . ;
1992.
4. MISRA-C:2004. Guidelines for the Use of the C Language in Critical Systems . The Motor Industry Software
Reliability Association; October 2004.
5. Working with Import Libraries and Export Files. Microsoft Development Network. http://msdn.microsoft.com/
library/default.asp?url ¼/library/en-us/vccore/html/_core_working_with_import_libraries_and_export_ﬁles.asp .
6. MISRA C þþ:2008. Guidelines for the Use of the C þþ Language in Critical Systems . The Motor Industry
Software Reliability Association; June 2008.
7.The Embedded C þþSpeciﬁcation, Version WP-AM-003 . The Embedded C þþTechnical Committee; October
1999.
8. Haden M. Embedded C þþ Slashes Code Size and Boosts Execution. http://www.ghs-rtos.com/wp/
ecþþarticle2.html ; 1998.
9. Watson AH, McCabe TJ. NIST Special Publication 500-235: Structured Testing: A Testing Methodology Using
the Cyclomatic Complexity Metric ; September 1996.
10. DiBona C, Ockman S, Stone M, editors. Voices from the Open Source Revolution . Sebastol, CA: O’Reilly;
1999.
11. “CDRH Software Forensics Lab: Applying Rocket Science to Device Analysis”; Chloe Taft, “Medical
Devices Technology, ” The Gray Sheet (October, 2007).206 Chapter 3

--- Page 217 ---
12. Boogerd C, Moonen L. Assessing the Value of Coding Standards: An Empirical Study . IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance; October 2008. 277 e86.
13. Barr M. Embedded C Coding Standard. Netrino; 2009.
14.www.splint.org .
15. ISO/IEC 9899-1999 (December 1999).
16. CdThe C1X Charter. Document WG14N1250 (June 2007).
17. ISO/IEC 14882:2011. Programming Language dCþþ(August 2011).
18. National Institute of Standards and Technology National Vulnerability Database. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/
vuln/detail?vulnId ¼CVE-2010-2836 .
19.General Principles of Software Validation. Final Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff . U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Center for Devices and Radiological Health; January 11, 2002.
20. Document RTCA/DO-178B. Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certiﬁcation .
RTCA; December 1992.
21. Dupuy A, Leveson N. An Empirical Evaluation of the MC/DC Coverage Criterion on the HETE-2
Satellite Software . Proceedings of the Digital Aviation Systems Conference (DASC); October 2000.
22. Sergiy VA, Bowen JP. From MC/DC to RC/DC: Formalization and Analysis of Control-Flow Testing Criteria.
Formal Aspects of Computing 2002; 18(1).
23.Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation, Part 3: Security Assurance Requirements,Version 2.1 . Section 6.2.4; August 1999.
24. Shapiro JS. Understanding the Windows EAL4 Evaluation. Computer February 2003; 36(2):103e 5.
25. Labeled Security Protection Proﬁle, Version 1.b. Section 1.2, p. 9. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/
PP_OS_LS_V1.b.pdf
26. U.S. Government Protection Proﬁle for General Purpose Operating Systems in a Networked Environment.
Version 1.0; August 30, 2010.
27. U.S. Government Protection Proﬁle for Separation Kernels in Environment Requiring High Robustness,
Version 1.03. Section 1.2, paragraph 9, p. 10. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/pp_skpp_hr_
v1.03.pdf .
28. Ibid., Section 2.8, paragraph 102, p. 47.29. Controlled Access Protection Proﬁle, Version 1.d. Section 1.2, p. 9. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/
pp_os_ca_v1.d.pdf
30. Ibid.31. Ibid.
32. Labeled Security Protection Proﬁle, Version 1.b. Section 1.2, p. 9. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/
PP_OS_LS_V1.b.pdf
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid.
35. U.S. Government Protection Proﬁle for Single-level Operating Systems in Medium Robustness Environments,
Version 1.91. Section 1.2, paragraph 11, p. 10. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/PP_OS_SL_MR2.0_
V1.91.pdf
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid., Section 3.1, paragraph 64, p. 28.38. Ibid.
39. U.S. Government Protection Proﬁle for Multilevel Operating Systems in Medium Robustness Environments,
Version 1.91. Section 1.2, paragraph 11, p. 10. http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/pp_os_ml_mr2.0_v1.
91.pdf
40. Ibid.41. Ibid., Section 3.1, paragraph 66, p. 30.
42. Ibid.43.Department of Defense Instruction 8500.2, Information Assurance (IA) Implementation ; February 6, 2003.Secure Embedded Software Development 207

--- Page 218 ---
44.Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation, Part 3: Security Assurance Requirements,
Version 2.1 . Section 10, paragraph 308; August 1999.
45. IEEE Std 610.12-1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology ; September 1990.
46. VDC Research. 2011 Embedded Engineer Survey ; 2011.
47. Ebert C, Jones C. Embedded Software: Facts, Figures, and Future. Computer April 2009; 42(4):42e 52.
48. Dijkstra EW. Notes on Structured Programming . Technological University Eindhoven, Department of
Mathematics. The Netherlands; August 1969.
49. Object Management Group. OMG Uniﬁed Modeling Language (OMG UML), Infrastructure, Version 2.4.1;
August 2011.
50. Friedenthal S, Moore A, Steiner R. A Practical Guide to SysML: The Systems Modeling Language . Burlington,
MA: Elsevier; 2008.
51. Mellor SJ, Balcer MJ. Executable UML, A Foundation for Model-Driven Architecture . Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley; 2002.
52. VDC Research. 2011 Embedded Engineer Survey ; 2011.
53. Prowell SJ, Poore JH. Speciﬁcation, Foundations of Sequence-Based Software. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering ; May 2003:417e 25.
54. Roscoe AW. Understanding Concurrent Systems . London: Springer Verlag London Ltd.; 2010.
55. Hoare CA. Monitors: An Operating System Structuring Concept. Communications of the ACM;
October 1974::547 e8.
56. Halbwachs N, Caspi P, Raymond P, Pilaud D. The Synchronous Dataﬂow Programming Language Lustre.
Proceedings of the IEEE September 1991; 79(9):1305 e20.
57. Berry G, Gonthier G. The Esterel Synchronous Programming Language, Design, Semantics and
Implementation. Science of Computer Programming ; February 1992:87 e152.
58. COTS Compartmentalized Operations Protection Proﬁle - Operating Systems (CCOPP-OS), Version 2.0; June
19, 2008.208 Chapter 3

--- Page 219 ---
CHAPTER 4
Embedded Cryptography
Chapter Outline
4.1 Introduction 210
4.2 U.S. Government Cryptographic Guidance 211
4.2.1 NSA Suite B 212
4.3 The One-Time Pad 213
4.3.1 Cryptographic Synchronization 222
4.4 Cryptographic Modes 224
4.4.1 Output Feedback 224
4.4.2 Cipher Feedback 2254.4.3 OFB with CFB Protection 226
4.4.4 Traffic Flow Security 227
4.4.5 Counter Mode 227
4.5 Block Ciphers 228
4.5.1 Additional Cryptographic Block Cipher Modes 231
4.6 Authenticated Encryption 232
4.6.1 CCM 2334.6.2 Galois Counter Mode 233
4.7 Public Key Cryptography 233
4.7.1 RSA 2364.7.2 Equivalent Key Strength 2364.7.3 Trapdoor Construction 238
4.8 Key Agreement 239
4.8.1 Man-in-the-Middle Attack on Diffie-Hellman 241
4.9 Public Key Authentication 241
4.9.1 Certificate Types 242
4.9.1.1 Custom Certificate Approaches for Embedded Systems 243
4.10 Elliptic Curve Cryptography 244
4.10.1 Elliptic Curve Digital Signatures 2454.10.2 Elliptic Curve Anonymous Key Agreement 245
4.11 Cryptographic Hashes 245
4.11.1 Secure Hash Algorithm 2464.11.2 MMO 247
4.12 Message Authentication Codes 248
4.13 Random Number Generation 248
4.13.1 True Random Number Generation 249
4.13.1.1 Case Study: Ring Oscillator-based Randomizer 250
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00004-7
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 209

--- Page 220 ---
4.13.2 Pseudo-Random Number Generation 254
4.13.2.1 NIST Special Publication 800-90 255
4.14 Key Management for Embedded Systems 256
4.14.1 Case Study: The Walker Spy Case 257
4.14.2 Key Management dGeneralized Model 258
4.14.3 Key Management Case Studies 264
4.14.3.1 Case Study: Secure Wireless Push-to-Talk Radio Network 264
4.14.3.2 Case Study: Generalized Phone Communications 270
4.15 Cryptographic Certifications 277
4.15.1 FIPS 140-2 Certification 277
4.15.1.1 FIPS 140-2 Standard 277
4.15.1.2 FIPS 140-3 279
4.15.2 NSA Certification 280
4.15.2.1 Cryptographic Product Classification 2804.15.2.2 Cryptographic Requirements for Type 1 Devices 281
4.15.2.3 NSA’s Cryptographic Interoperability Strategy 283
4.16 Key Points 285
4.17 Bibliography and Notes 287
4.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces and describes the fundamental concepts of modern digital
cryptography. Many textbooks describe the history of cryptography, starting in Roman timeswith the invention and use of Caesar’s cipher, consisting of a single alphabetic substitutionbased on a secret number of cyclic shifts in the alphabet, to the poly-alphabetic Enigmacipher used by the Germans during World War II. All these ciphers used mechanical rotorsand wheels to substitute characters in some random manner. Most of the ciphers, likeCaesar’s cipher, were either fundamentally ﬂawed or relatively easily broken, like theEnigma. The history of these ciphers is so fascinating and extensive that we could notpossibly do it justice covering it here. For readers interested in a more thorough background,we recommend the following books that cover the fascinating evolution of cryptography.
1e3
Readers who already have a good understanding of basic cryptography may wish to skipahead to the case studies later in this chapter.
In this chapter, we begin with fundamental principles of cryptography, including the
description of a cipher that is unconditionally secure: the one-time pad (OTP). And using theone-time pad as a foundation, we grow the discourse across the core modern-day symmetrickey ciphers: keystream and codebook. For each, we discuss the applicable modes of operation,cryptographic synchronization, and key management aspects required for a securecryptosystem.210 Chapter 4

--- Page 221 ---
We then cover public key cryptography and its extensive use in modern cryptography for
dynamically establishing secret keys between two communicating entities.
We follow the fundamental descriptions with practical examples of digital cryptosystems,
pointing out threats and vulnerabilities and mitigation techniques to counter these threats.
While this chapter provides a good overview of both symmetric (stream and block ciphers) and
asymmetric cryptography (public key) principles and methods of operation, we do not attemptto describe in detail the cryptographic algorithm speciﬁcations. Detailed speciﬁcations forunclassiﬁed algorithms are available in the public domain, readily accessible on the Internet.For symmetric cryptography, a suggested reading is the U.S. National Institute of Standardsand Technology (NIST) Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUBS)Advanced Encryption Standard (AES):
 NIST FIPS PUB 197, “Advanced Encryption Standard, 2001,” http://csrc.nist.go v/
publications/ﬁps/ﬁps19
7/ﬁps-197.pdf
For asymmetric cryptography, the following algorithms are used extensively today:
RSA: SeePKCS #1: “RSA Cryptography Standard, Version 2.1,” ftp://ftp.rsasecurity.com/
pub/pkcs/pkcs-1/pkcs-1v2-1.pdf
Difﬁe-Hellman: See PKCS #3: “Difﬁe-Hellman Key Agreement Standard,” ftp://ftp.
rsasecurity.com/pub/pkcs/doc/pkcs-3.doc
Elliptic Curve (ECC): See NIST FIPS PUB 186-3, “Digital Signature Standard, 2009,”
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ﬁps/ﬁps186-3/ﬁps_186-3.pdf. Also, see NIST Special
Publication 800-56A, “Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key Establishment Schemes UsingDiscrete Logarithm Cryptography” (March, 2007).
This chapter’s endnotes include additional sources for further reading.
Finally ,
we also discuss a topic that is often misunderstood or neglected by embedded systems
designers: how to design and incorporate secure cryptographic elements into embedded
systems that have applicable conﬁdentiality or authentication requirements. We illustrate thisusing several case studies in the later part of this chapter.
4.2 U.S. Government Cryptographic Guidance
There are two major sources of cryptographic guidance and standards originating from the U.S.government: NIST (mentioned previously) and the NSA. In addition to the FIPS PUBS, NISTalso writes “special publications,” such as SP 800-57, which provides recommendations forkey management and is referred to several times in this chapter and in Chapter 5 on dataprotection protocols. Whereas NIST collects good commercial practices from the worldwidecryptographic community and distills these practices into important standards andEmbedded Cryptography 211

--- Page 222 ---
recommendations, the NSA is entrusted with the protection of the U.S. government’s most
sensitive (classiﬁed) information.
Key Point
It behooves embedded systems developers to understand NSA cryptographic guidance, even
though NSA certiﬁcation is not required for most embedded systems.
FIPS 140-2 and NSA cryptographic certiﬁcation and additional background on NSA
cryptographic strategy are covered later in this chapter.
4.2.1 NSA Suite B
To complement the existing national policy on the use of AES to protect national SecurityInformation (CNSSP-15),
4the NSA announced Suite B cryptography at the 2005 RSA
conference.
Key Point
NSA Suite B includes a suite of unclassiﬁed cryptographic algorithms providing a variety of
cryptographic services required in modern cryptography, including encryption, hashing, digitalsignatures, and key exchanges.
The entire suite of cryptographic algorithms is intended to protect both classiﬁed (Top Secret
and Secret) and unclassiﬁed national security systems and information. The NSA’s Suite Bwebsite contains references to the preferred algorithms.
5In addition, Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF) standards, in the form of RFCs, document Suite B guidance with respect to theuse of cryptography in many popular network security protocols, such as IPsec. The role ofSuite B in recent NSA certiﬁcation and approval strategy is discussed later in this chapter.
While Suite B guidance is mentioned throughout this chapter as we discuss the applicable
classes of cryptographic functions, Table 4.1 , which lists algorithm choice and key lengths for
secret and top-secret data protection, may serve as a handy quick reference.
Table 4.1: NSA suite B guidance for algorithm and key lengths
Function Algorithm Secret Key Size Top Secret Key Size
Symmetric Key AES 128 256
Public Key Signature ECDSA 256 384
Key Agreement ECDH 256 384
Hash SHA-2 256 384212 Chapter 4

--- Page 223 ---
4.3 The One-Time Pad
Throughout recorded history, cryptography has been used to protect information. The one-time
pad system, ﬁrst introduced in 1917 by Gilbert Vernam, who was awarded a patent on theinvention,
6is an extremely simple encryption scheme that can be implemented, literally, with
a couple of note pads. Also of great importance is the formal theoretical proof of the security ofthe OTP by Claude Shannon in 1945 (declassiﬁed and published in 1949).
7In particular,
Shannon proved the perfect secrecy of the OTP: an adversary, having intercepted encrypted
communications (ciphertext) and possessing unlimited resources in which to attempt to recoverthe original message (plaintext) from the encrypted message, is provably unable to distinguishthe ciphertext from random data. This is also referred to as unconditionally secure; OTPprovides no information about the original message.
Key Point
Because of its proven, unconditional, and simple security, the one-time pad is often considered
the basis of all good encryption systems.
Since cryptography almost invariably involves trade-offs and compromises, the one-time pad
remains a refreshing beacon of purity in the cryptographic world.
Emulation and digital implementation of the unbreakable one-time pad system can be best
described by ﬁrst developing a digital binary equivalent of the one-time pad, as shown inFigure 4.1 .
Figure 4.1:
Binary equivalent of one-time pad.Embedded Cryptography 213

--- Page 224 ---
Two parties desire to communicate and protect the communication from eavesdroppers. One of
the parties, prior to secure communication, develops a very long paper tape punched witha hole for logic or binary one and no hole for logic or binary zero. The sequence of paper tapepunches is randomly determined by the toss of a coin, with heads denoting logic one, and tailsdenoting logic zero. Each coin toss event has a 50% probability of being heads or tails, and thusthe paper tape contains a truly random sequence. After this long paper tape is punched asdescribed, one and only one duplicate copy is made of the paper tape. We now have twoidentical paper tapes containing the same random stream of ones and zeros. One of the papertapes is securely couriered (a discussion of potential courier mechanisms is left out of thisdiscussion and independent of the core encryption concept we are describing) to the other endof the communication link, and then we establish the following secure communicationprotocol.
At the transmitting end, the message to be encrypted is interpreted as an equivalent string of
ones and zeros. For example, the message “hello” may be converted to a binary sequence of sixbytes (48 bits total) where each byte contains the digital ASCII representation of thecorresponding string character (followed by a terminating zero). We call this string the plaintext transmit (PTT). The PTT is now operated on by the exclusive - or (XOR) function with therandom stream from the paper tape ( Table 4.2 ).
The output of the XOR operated on the entire PTT is called the cipher text transmit (CTT). Forevery bit of PTT processed, the paper tape is moved forward to the next hole/no hole position.The used portion of the paper tape, as it is moved forward, is permanently discarded (it mustnever be reused). We follow this process of applying a bit of the paper tape’s random stream toa bit of the PTT until the entire PTT string is enciphered or encrypted. We then send theenciphered message across the communication channel. For this example, assume it is a point-to-point wire, like a ﬁber cable, connected from the transmitter of the message to the receiverof the message.
Once the entire message has been sent, the receiver proceeds to decipher or decrypt the
message by following the same identical process as the transmitter: for every bit of the ciphertext received (CTR, as the CTT becomes the CTR at the receive end), we XOR the CTR withthe duplicate paper tape’s random stream. By the properties of the XOR function, the process is
Table 4.2: Exclusive-or function
PTT Random Stream Cipher
00 0
01 1
10 111 0214 Chapter 4

--- Page 225 ---
reversible, and thus we obtain the plain text receive (PTR), which matches the PTT. As an
example, assume that the PTT and random stream (RS) are as follows:
PTT: 10101110001100001
RS: 01011111100010011
The XOR operations are shown in Table 4.3 .
As shown in the table, PTT matches PTR, and we thus successfully encrypted and decrypted
a message containing a string of ones and zeros. The message could be very long (as long as thevery long paper tape). For every subsequent PTT message, we follow the same process,discarding the used tape as we pull it forward, until the paper tape is exhausted. For subsequentmessages, we restart the whole process, generating and distributing a new random paper tape.
Intuitively, we can state that this method of enciphering a message is unconditionally secure.
We assume that sender and receiver are able to keep their respective plaintexts physicallysecure; thus, an eavesdropper monitoring the communication channel can only obtain thecipher text (CTT or CTR). Since an eavesdropper does not have the random stream encoded onthe paper tape, attempting to guess any bit of the plaintext from the cipher text results in a 50%chance that he obtains the incorrect plaintext bit. Thus, the attacker is unable to distinguish theencrypted message from random data (see Figure 4.2 ). We can thus claim that the system is
unconditionally secure.Table 4.3: One-time pad sequence: plain text receive (PTR) matches plain text transmit (PTT)
when ran
dom streams are equal
Transmitter Receiver
PTT RS CTT CTR RS PTR
101 1 0 1
011 1 1 0
101 1 0 1
011 1 1 0110 0 1 1
110 0 1 1
110 0 1 1011 1 1 0
011 1 1 0
000 0 0 0101 1 0 1
101 1 0 1
011 1 1 0000 0 0 0000 0 0 0
011 1 1 0
110 0 1 1Embedded Cryptography 215

--- Page 226 ---
With current technology, the one-time pad system is very simple to implement. Instead of
a long paper tape, we can employ a pair of duplicate memory devices, such as USB thumbdrives, to store the random sequence and deliver to both ends of a communications channel.With a thumb drive (available since 2010), up to 32 billion bytes of messages can be securelycommunicated using this method.
While this system is simple and easily implementable, it is not efﬁcient since it requires
a random stream as long as the message itself and introduces the logistical challenge ofsecurely distributing the media to all potential communicators. Furthermore, a compromise ofthe random stream encoded on the ﬂash media results in a compromise of all messages betweenany pair of nodes ever sent using it, as shown in Figure 4.3 .
Furthermore, if one node is compromised in a shared paper tape system, the shared paper tapemust be revoked from use, requiring regeneration and redistribution of a new random sequenceto all remaining uncompromised nodes. It is easy to see how physical distribution andprotection of shared paper tapes quickly become untenable. In general, it is a bad idea to sharea single long-term random stream between a large set of nodes.
If each unique pair of communicators uses a per-pair unique paper tape, then compromise of
a single paper tape affects only a single communications channel between one pair of nodes.All other pairs of nodes and their communications are unaffected.
How can we retain our desired property of unconditional security while avoiding the long
stream distribution problem? One way would be to securely distribute a short random streamand use this short sequence to locally and deterministically generate a long, shared randomstream. This would improve efﬁciency, and we would need to protect only the short random
Figure 4.2:
An eavesdropper without access to the original one-time pad random source cannot recover
plaintext.216 Chapter 4

--- Page 227 ---
stream as it is distributed to all nodes. Moreover, if we can implement such a system efﬁciently
in either hardware or software, we would be guaranteed that the system is secure.
To describe the concept of using a short stream to generate a long one, assume that the paper
tape shown in Figure 4.1 is not very long but tied end to end. This looped tape still contains
a random stream, but the random stream will repeat itself after the loop has completed onecycle. We would like to implement this ﬁnite loop in such a manner that both the transmitterand receiver generate the same long random stream using a short random stream that waspreviously distributed securely, as shown in Figure 4.4 . The input sequence is called the key,
and the resulting long stream is now called a random keystream .
Only the key is securely distributed to the receiver, and because both endpoints use the samelooping mechanism to generate the random keystream, we are assured that both endpoints havethe same random keystream. Note that before encrypting any messages, we must synchronizethe long keystreams at both ends; in other words, even if both ends have the same key, if oneend starts the keystream at a different point in the long loop, they will not be able tocommunicate since they are not using the same sequence of random bits.
In practice, duplicating the short sequence to create the long loop is a faulty approach: the
repeating sequence would be easily discernible by an attacker, defeating the requiredrandomness property. Instead, we must use a mechanism that takes a short random key andgenerates a long stream that is also random.
We can digitally implement this keystream derived by a relatively short key. The generation of
this keystream is driven by a cryptographic algorithm and can be implemented in hardware,software, or a combination, depending on the data rate of the encryption required and thespeed of the computer that runs the software. For voice applications, the required data rate may
Figure 4.3:
A compromised random source allows an eavesdropper to recover all messages.Embedded Cryptography 217

--- Page 228 ---
be no higher than 64 kilobytes per second, while video encryption may require gigabits per
second. A potential implementation of a keystream is shown in Figure 4.5 . Although this
implementation is infeasible for a secure cryptosystem, we use it to highlight the concept.
The keystream is implemented using a long shift register (80 bits or greater to give us
a reasonably long loop), whose taps (bit output stages of the shift register) are combined with
Figure 4.5:
Simpliﬁed keystream generator.
Figure 4.4:
Long random keystream.218 Chapter 4

--- Page 229 ---
non-linear combinatorial elements and the key. This combinatorial block thoroughly mixes the
outputs of the shift register with the key and is called the cryptographic algorithm of the
keystream. We wire the keystream output to the ﬁrst stage of the shift register, and if wecontinually clock this conﬁguration, we obtain a digital long loop tape that is connected end toend, generating a random keystream whose cycle repeats itself after 2 to the N (2^N) bits,where N is the number of bits in the shift register. The shift register is initialized with a randomsequence of N bits, and we denote this initial state as the initialization vector (IV). Theinitialization vector is the starting point of our digital tape. We symbolically represent thiskeystream generator as shown in Figure 4.6 .
We have now developed a cryptosystem as shown in Figure 4.7 .
Figure 4.6:
Symbolic representation of keystream generator.
Figure 4.7:
Keystream-based cryptosystem.Embedded Cryptography 219

--- Page 230 ---
Figure 4.7 is identical to Figure 4.1 , except that the one-time pad has been changed to
a keystream generator, identically implemented at both ends and driven by a common key that
was previously distributed securely via courier or other means and loaded into the keystreamgenerator at both ends. As shown in Figure 4.7 , for the PTT to match the PTR, we must make
sure that the IVof the transmitter (IVT) matches the IVof the receiver (IVR) and that the key ofthe transmitter (KT) matches the key of the receiver (KR).
How do we synchronize IVT to IVR? One way is to send the IV in the clear from the transmitter
to the receiver. The receiver is now in possession of the required initialization sequence andknows that subsequent cipher text will have been generated using the start of the keystreamgenerated by this IV. An eavesdropper receiving the IV will also be able to synchronize her evilkey generator to the same starting point as the legitimate transmitter and receiver. However, theeavesdropper’s PTR will be random since she lacks possession of the key and therefore cannotproduce an equivalent keystream as the transmitter and receiver. If the key is compromised andthe eavesdropper knows the cryptographic algorithm (as is often the case), the eavesdropperwill be able to decrypt all the messages by using the same IV synchronization.
For each message, the transmitter generates a new IV to avoid reuse of a previous keystream
(see Figure 4.8 ).
What happens when a new key is introduced to our key generator? A new random keystream isgenerated, and the new one does not match the old, as shown in Figure 4.9 .
Figure 4.8:
New IV generated for each cryptoperiod.220 Chapter 4

--- Page 231 ---
By periodically creating a new key, we have the equivalent of an arbitrarily long digital tape
with an arbitrarily long random keystream. This enables the cryptosystem to handle messagetrafﬁc for the lifetime of the equipment without ever reusing the same random keystream.
If a key is compromised, all the ciphertext associated with that key is compromised, but not the
ciphertext encrypted with any other key.
Key Point
The lifetime of a key’s use within a cryptosystem is called the key’s cryptoperiod.
Suppose an eavesdropper stores all ciphertext and subsequently mounts an attack byexhaustively trying all keys to decrypt the content. Assuming he succeeds, he will be able todecrypt only the messages generated during the cracked key’s cryptoperiod (see Figure 4.10 ).
Any messages received with another key will require a new exhaustive attack that is at bestextremely time consuming and at worst infeasible for keys of sufﬁcient length.
Figure 4.10:
Compromise of a session key results in compromise of trafﬁc only within the compromised key’s
cryptoperiod.
Figure 4.9:
Different keystreams for different keys.Embedded Cryptography 221

--- Page 232 ---
The one-time pad and related keystream systems use symmetric keys: the transmitter and
receiver must agree and use the same key to be able to communicate securely. The security of
the system rests in the key, which must remain secret. Once a key is divulged, copied, orcompromised, anyone can decrypt or encrypt messages even if the crypto algorithm isproprietary and not public.
Key Point
For the purposes of determining cryptographic strength, proprietary or secret algorithms are
always assumed broken (fully understood and reproducible by an attacker) through either reverse
engineering or other means.
Moreover, if a portion of the key is compromised, the system is more vulnerable to an
exhaustive attack by reducing the size of the key space that must be searched. For example,while an 80-bit key would normally require the attacker to try 2^80 different keys, the attackerneeds only 2^40 searches if one-half of the key bits have been compromised.
Table 4.4 presents some examples of the time required to unlock or break a combinatorial lock
or key relative to its bits of freedom. The length of time required to break a particular key is
called its work function . As shown in the table, an exhaustive attack for a 120-bit key takes
a really long time (RLT). If that key is changed frequently, as in every message, the exhaustiveattack becomes an exercise in futility, even with unlimited computing power.
4.3.1 Cryptographic Synchronization
As shown in Figure 4.7 , for the symmetric cryptosystem to function properly, the IV used at the
transmit and receive endpoints must be the same for a corresponding sequence of ciphertextgenerated with the IV. Typically, the sender simply transmits the IV in the clear prior to theciphertext for that IV. For digital systems, IV synchronization can take place only if bothtransmit and receive clocks are in phase and synchronized. Additional synchronizationtechniques, including clock recovery from the data stream, must be employed when thetransmitter and receiver are physically separated. For the purpose of this discussion, we assumethat transmit and receive clocks are already synchronized and only the IV requiresTable 4.4: Work function for some ciphers
Standard Combination Safe Cipher Lock 120-Bit Variable
Combinations 10660 2120¼1.33/C21036
Trial Rate 10/minute 1/sec 1/msec
Mean Time to Break 833 hours
34 days30 seconds 0.72 /C21025days
2.1/C21022years
2.1/C21020centuries222 Chapter 4

--- Page 233 ---
synchronization. In practice, clock synchronization is usually handled by hardware
transparently to the system or software developer.
As previously described, for long keystreams, the IV register is normally 80 bits long or
greater. These 80 bits must be received perfectly with no errors to achieve cryptographicsynchronization (i.e., IVT ¼IVR). If even one of the received IV bits is in error, there is a 50%
probability that each transmit keystream bit will mismatch with the corresponding receiverkeystream bit. Cryptographic synchronization will not be achieved, and the resulting plaintextreceived will be random data. Moreover, the communication endpoints will not know thatcryptographic synchronization has failed and will continue to encrypt and decrypt until theplaintext processor (e.g., software or human) determines that the data being received isincorrect and issues a cryptographic re-synchronization command.
Bit errors occur naturally for some communication media, and the system designer must take
this fact into account when designing the communications protocol to ensure that the IV isperfectly received even in the presence of communication errors. Some communicationchannels, such as radio frequency (RF) channels, may have as much as a 10% bit error rate. Thesystem designer must use a robust IV error-encoding scheme, which may include errordetection, error correction, or both, depending on the quality of the channel. Error encoding/decoding can be performed in hardware, software, or a combination. Furthermore, upper-levelprotocols, such as IPsec, can be used to provide error detection and integrity protection oftransmitted IVs.
For the purposes of the following discussion, we assume the IV is perfectly received into the
receiver key generator. Once the IV is loaded, encryption/decryption can take place even in thepresence of channel errors. As shown in Figure 4.7 , once the IVT matches to the IVR, the
keystream generated at both ends is not affected by any transmission errors in the ciphertext.An error in the ciphertext will simply result in a corresponding bit error in the receivedplaintext; assuming clock synchronization is robust, cryptographic synchronization ismaintained. We can state that this scheme exhibits single-bit error extension , sufﬁcient for
many cryptographic applications. For example, voice communications can tolerate a fewplaintext errors, not affecting the intelligibility due to the high redundancy in speech.
However, for data applications, lack of integrity in even a single PTR bit can adversely affect
the message content while still appearing to the receiver as a legitimate message. Aneavesdropper monitoring the channel may at certain times actively force an error in the channelsuch that the message received is altered. For example, let’s consider a bank transactionmessage: “transfer 10,000 dollars to this account.” An eavesdropper may alter the content ofthe message to “transfer 100,000 dollars to this account” (see Figure 4.11 ), not a desirable
outcome for the bank but highly satisfying to the eavesdropper if it happens to be his account.Even if the attacker has not broken the encryption and can modify only ciphertext, if theattacker sees patterns in messages and knows where the dollar amount is located, he can makeEmbedded Cryptography 223

--- Page 234 ---
educated guesses about how to insert malicious ciphertext. This type of an attack is called
aspoofed message attack , a form of man-in-the-middle attack. Cryptography can provide
countermeasures for message spooﬁng and many other attacks by providing specializedcryptographic modes of operation.
4.4 Cryptographic Modes
Key Point
Cryptographic modes enable the application of encryption to speciﬁc use cases that have varying
requirements:
Some modes enable simultaneous origin authentication and data protection.
Some modes have been created simply for improved execution time efﬁciency.
Some modes propagate bit errors and thus thwart spooﬁng attacks.
Other modes sacriﬁce anti-spooﬁng in exchange for bit error tolerance.
4.4.1 Output Feedback
As shown in Figure 4.7 , the keystream cipher internally feeds the keystream output back into
the IV register. This internal feedback is called Output Feedback (OFB) orKey Auto Key
(KAK). This cryptographic mode is error tolerant in the channel but vulnerable to spooﬁng.
One or more bits of feedback may be used depending on the implementation. For example, the
key generation function may be structured to XOR each byte of PTT with one byte ofkeystream and one byte of feedback. While output is generated in byte (or larger) blocks, thecommunications channel often requires serialization of the stream. Parallel-to-serialconversion is usually handled transparently by the physical and/or data link interface. OFBmode implemented with N bits of feedback is shown in Figure 4.12 . OFB mode guarantees
Figure 4.11:
Eavesdropper spooﬁng attack.224 Chapter 4

--- Page 235 ---
message conﬁdentiality but does not provide good message integrity; an attacker who is able to
manipulate the channel can effect the modiﬁcation of any individual bit in the plaintext.
4.4.2 Cipher Feedback
A variation of OFB is Cipher Feedback (CFB) orCipher Text Auto Key (CTAK) mode, as shown
inFigure 4.13 :
Unlike OFB, CFB mode feeds the cipher output into the IV register instead of the keystream.Similar to OFB, cipher feedback can be one or N bits. Because the initial N bit output of the
Figure 4.12:
Output feedback (OFB) mode.
Figure 4.13:
Cipher feedback (CFB) mode.Embedded Cryptography 225

--- Page 236 ---
cipher is used as the IV, CFB mode does not require an explicit IV to be transmitted. Thus, CFB
is self-synchronizing, with the keystreams of the transmitter and receiver matching as soon asthe IV register values at both endpoints match. Cryptographic synchronization is achieved afterN bits of cipher processing, where N is the IV register’s bit length.
With CFB, a single-bit error in the channel extends to an N-bit error in the decrypted result.
The endpoints self-resynchronize after N bits of cipher processing. This error magniﬁcationprovides some anti-spooﬁng protection, as the eavesdropper is no longer able to effect theassignment of speciﬁc individual bits in the plaintext. If the attacker modiﬁes a bit of ciphertextin transit, N bits of plaintext will be corrupted, but corrupted unpredictably. On the other hand,CFB exhibits degraded efﬁciency in noisy communication channels due to the longersynchronization gaps. This lack of robustness may be sufﬁcient to disrupt voicecommunication.
4.4.3 OFB with CFB Protection
This hybrid mode augments the efﬁciency beneﬁts of OFB with data integrity protection.One implementation method uses an OFB mode key generator as the main encryptor anda smaller CFB key generator for anti-spooﬁng protection (see Figure 4.14 ).
Five bits of error extension are provided in this example. While this thwarts simple spooﬁngattacks, a larger CFB key generator (e.g., 32 bits or more of feedback) provides improvedprotection.
Figure 4.14:
OFB with anti-spooﬁng CFB.226 Chapter 4

--- Page 237 ---
4.4.4 Trafﬁc Flow Security
Key Point
A desirable trait of secure communications algorithms and protocols, trafﬁc ﬂow security (TFS)
aims to prevent an eavesdropper from deducing private information from patterns in commu-
nication rather than the communicated encrypted data itself.
For example, because the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol transmits a message for each keystroke
during an interactive session, researchers have used the time between keystrokes as input tostatistical analysis techniques to recover passwords much faster than an exhaustive search.
8
Removing structural or timing patterns in communication thwarts these kinds of attacks. TFS isone form of the more general concept of transmission security , which aims to protect against
attacks that fall outside the scope of cryptanalytic attacks on the encrypted data. Anotherexample of transmission security is the use of anti-jamming techniques on radio frequency(RF) communications. We mention TFS here because it is pertinent to the choice of encryptionmode. In particular, the use of initialization vectors in the clear within the communicationsstream may allow an eavesdropper to deduce the starts and ends of messages or sessions. Keepthis in mind as we discuss more modes in the following sections.
4.4.5 Counter Mode
Counter Mode , sometimes called Long Cycle Mode (LCM) , is shown in Figure 4.15 . LCM has
similar security properties to OFB; the main difference is IV generation: in OFB, the IV israndom, but LCM’s IV is generated using an initial value that is incremented after everycryptoperiod (for the session in which the same key is used).
Figure 4.15:
Long cycle (counter) mode.Embedded Cryptography 227

--- Page 238 ---
Similar to OFB, LCM has no error extension and is thus vulnerable to message spooﬁng. The
IV counter can be a true maximum length sequence generator , providing the added beneﬁt of
a very long non-repeating keystream. In LCM, the IV counter can be based on a real-timeclock. When a real-time clock is used, cryptographic synchronization can be based on time-of-day (TOD), a date value that never repeats. If the TOD is synchronized at both endpoints, IVtransmission is unnecessary. Therefore, counter modes using TOD are useful in trafﬁc ﬂowsecurity, as described earlier.
Another beneﬁt of this approach is applicability to broadcast receivers such as digital set-top
boxes. Many such systems lack full-duplex, two-way communication. Instead, a single
transmitter broadcasts information to a large number of one-way receivers. The use of TOD-based counter mode allows a receiver to enter the communication stream at an arbitrary timewithout requiring an explicit cryptographic synchronization. For example, the TOD countermay increment once per day. When a receiver is powered up, it can quickly check its internalreal-time clock and derive the current TOD counter, providing instant synchronization toencrypted broadcast content.
4.5 Block Ciphers
The IV register is used as the starting point of a keystream cipher. Suppose that instead ofusing the IV register as a starting point, we use it as an input register for plaintext, asshown in Figure 4.16 , and then apply the non-linear cryptographic algorithm to the input
register.
Figure 4.16:
Generalized block cipher.228 Chapter 4

--- Page 239 ---
This conﬁguration results in encryption of blocks of plaintext where a block can be as long as
128 bits for modern algorithms such as AES. Block ciphers function similarly to keystreamciphers but have different properties. Block ciphers are useful for data-at-rest encryptedstorage, but they can also be used to implement a keystream-like bit-by-bit encryptedcommunications mechanism. For block ciphers, the encryption and decryption process isshown in Figure 4.17 .
A block cipher transforms an input block (a string of input bits of ﬁxed length) into an outputblock that is a string of output bits of the same ﬁxed length. The cipher is a function of a keyand some non-linear transformation. The block cipher (cryptographic algorithm) may use thesame non-linear function used for keystream ciphers. The cipher thoroughly mixes the bits ofthe input block such that every bit of the output block depends jointly on every bit of the inputblock and every bit of the key. This mixing of the input block with the key provides protectionagainst cryptanalysis by an adversary.
Key Point
Block ciphers must be designed such that knowledge of large amounts of matched input and
output blocks is insufﬁcient to determine the key other than by exhaustive search of all possible
keys for the applicable key length.
Figure 4.17:
Encryption and decryption using N-bit block cipher.Embedded Cryptography 229

--- Page 240 ---
The mixing must make sure that small changes to the input block or small changes to the key
result in major changes in the output block: the goal is 50% variation of the output bits whenthe cipher is run with an input block or key that has a single different bit.
Most modern algorithms, such as the Data Encryption Standard (DES) or Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES), are designed as block ciphers but can be conﬁgured as keystreamciphers in all modes previously discussed (OFB, CFB, LCM). Figure 4.18 depicts a block
cipher conﬁgured as a keystream cipher.
Block ciphers are sometimes termed electronic codebook (ECB); the names are used
interchangeably. ECB ciphers always generate the same output block given a particular input
block. Thus, large streams of plaintext can easily reveal patterns in the plaintext. This alsomakes ECB vulnerable to reordered ciphertext attacks: reordering (or injecting) ciphertextblocks into the communications channel causes the exact same reordering of the decryptedplaintext, potentially changing the message to beneﬁt the attacker without the receiver beingaware of the tamper. All ECB ciphers must have a reversible deciphering process.
Key Point
AES is the preferred block cipher in NSA Suite B.
Two hundred ﬁfty-six-bit keys are used to protect top-secret information, and 128-bit or 256-bit keys are used to protect secret information. This key length guidance is applicable to all
Figure 4.18:
Block cipher conﬁgured as a keystream cipher.230 Chapter 4

--- Page 241 ---
encryption and authenticated encryption modes. Current NIST guidance states that AES with
128-bit keys will be sufﬁcient for general-purpose products until the year 2030.
4.5.1 Additional Cryptographic Block Cipher Modes
ECB mode is useful for encryption of small data or keys but is not used for bulk informationprotection due to the reordered block vulnerability. The Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode,
shown in Figure 4.19 , addresses this reordering attack.
In CBC mode, each input block (except for the initial block) is XOR’d to the previous outputblock. This feedback loop prevents the reordering attack since modiﬁcation of a ciphertextblock will necessarily corrupt all subsequent decrypted blocks.
CBC mode can be used only with block ciphers. A single-bit channel error results in corruption
of the current plaintext block and a corresponding error in the plaintext bit of the next block. Anactive eavesdropper, attempting to modify the ciphertext, will cause signiﬁcant loss of recoveredplaintext. Thus, CBC mode prevents message spooﬁng. Because of this property, CBC mode issometimes used in message authentication schemes. In such a scheme, a secret key is used to
generate a Message Authentication Code (MAC) from the plaintext. If the receiver is able tocompute the same MAC, then she is assured that the message arrived intact (data integrity) andmust have come from the holder of the same secret key (origin authenticity). One such scheme istheCBC Message Authentication Code (CBC-MAC) algorithm. In CBC-MAC, the last cipher
block of a CBC message encryption is input into the CBC cipher as an additional input block,enciphered, and the result appended to the ciphertext output. This result block is the MAC. At thereceiver, a MAC is generated using the same key and veriﬁed to match bit for bit with thereceived MAC. Because a ciphertext block depends on all preceding plaintext blocks,a matching ﬁnal block (authentication code) is possible if and only if the complete messagearrived intact. MACs are covered in more depth later in this chapter.
Figure 4.19:
Cipher block chaining (CBC) encryption mode.Embedded Cryptography 231

--- Page 242 ---
As can be seen from Figure 4.19 , CBC mode uses an initialization vector (IV) as input to the
cryptographic function. The security of CBC mode requires that the IV not be predictable (i.e.,
a simple counter will not do), and thus randomly generated numbers are often used for thispurpose. The IV need not be kept secret and is usually transmitted directly to the receiver thatuses the same IV for the symmetric decryption process. Random number generation isdiscussed later in this chapter.
Key Point
For key encryption (otherwise known as key wrapping), variable-width ECB is the preferred
encryption mode.
We have already seen that for ECB, a single-bit difference in input block or key results in
corruption of all associated plaintext (with at least 50% variation in output block). WhileECB is usually employed with 64- or 128-bit blocks, extension to a larger block size (tohandle a key that is larger than a single block) is affected through the use of a variable-width
ECB , essentially a wrapper around a ﬁxed-width ECB that exhibits the same security
properties as the ﬁxed-width ECB. The NIST AES key wrap algorithm uses a variable-widthECB.
9For example, let’s consider a 256-bit input that we wish to wrap using a 128-bit key
encryption key and the AES-ECB algorithm. The naı ¨ve approach would apply AES-ECB
twice, once for each block of the input in sequence. However, if given another 256-bit inputthat matches the previous input, except with the two blocks swapped, then the 256-bit resultwill also match the previous result except for the same block swap. Thus, the block-by-blockencryption reveals patterns in the input data. In contrast, the NIST key wrap speciﬁcationensures that a 256-bit input follows the same property as a single-block ECB: any single-bitchange in the input will yield a completely different 256-bit result, as if the AES block sizewas actually 256 bits.
There are numerous other encryption modes in use today, but the preceding discussion covers
the fundamental modes and how they protect against common attacks such as messagespooﬁng and reordering. The following section discusses a class of modes that combineconﬁdentiality (encryption) and integrity protection.
4.6 Authenticated Encryption
Key Point
Authenticated encryption can be more computationally efﬁcient than executing independent
encryption and authentication algorithms.232 Chapter 4

--- Page 243 ---
There are numerous authenticated encryption algorithms; in this section we discuss two of the
more popular modes: CCM and GCM.
4.6.1 CCM
CCM mode (Counter with CBC-MAC), used in the ZigBee wireless standard, is a combinationof counter mode for encryption and CBC-MAC for authentication. CCM is also mandated as in802.11i (also known as WPA2), the modern authentication scheme for Wi-Fi. The 802.11istandard is discussed in Chapter 5. In CCM, counter mode is used to transform the entireplaintext into ciphertext. Then the CBC-MAC is used to compute the digest over the entireciphertext. CCM is deﬁned in RFC 3610,
10and compatibly is deﬁned in NIST Special
Publication 800-38C.11
4.6.2 Galois Counter Mode
Key Point
Galois Counter Mode (GCM) is the Suite B-recommended authenticated encryption cipher.
AES-GCM is referenced in several Suite B guidance documents, including RFC 4869 (IPsec)and RFC 5430 (TLS). AES-GCM is desirable because it can be implemented efﬁciently inhardware. Like CBC, GCM requires an initialization vector. However, unlike CBC, the GCMIV need not be unpredictable, although it must be unique for each invocation with a given key.
On the downside, performance-optimized software implementations of GCM often require
a large amount of RAM in the form of dynamically computed tables. For resource-constrainedembedded devices that lack AES-GCM hardware ofﬂoad, the footprint overhead may beprohibitive. Otherwise, the use of AES-GCM for authenticated encryption is a very goodchoice, both for its ease of use and for its preferred treatment by the U.S. government. Onmodern Intel Architecture (IA) chipsets, the Intel AES-NI instruction set can be used toimplement optimized AES-GCM without any additional cryptographic hardware.
12
4.7 Public Key Cryptography
Martin Hellman and Whitﬁeld Difﬁe ﬁrst published a public key cryptosystem in 1976. Severalcontemporaries of Hellman and Difﬁe also lay claim to the invention of public keycryptography in the 1970s. While the concepts introduced were revolutionary and describeda set of security services that symmetric cryptography could not provide, public keycryptography was not extensively used until the early 2000s when the Internet age trulyexploded. The growth of the Internet and its associated e-commerce transactions now requiredadditional digital security services, enabled by public key cryptography. These securityEmbedded Cryptography 233

--- Page 244 ---
services include integrity and authentication of large multimedia ﬁles, digital signatures, and
non-repudiation for all types of commercial and legal transactions.
Many educational sources attribute the creation of public key cryptography to rectifying an
inherent practical weakness in symmetric key cryptography: its key distribution problem,also sometimes called the bootstrapping problem. Tor any two endpoints in a large network
to communicate using symmetric cryptography, the network operators must ﬁrst distributea shared symmetric key between the two parties. This distribution could be done as a privatein-person meeting or via some trustworthy courier service. The in-person prooﬁng providesassurance that only authorized communicators are using the key. In a worldwide network,this kind of distribution is clearly impractical. With public key cryptography, the symmetrickey is replaced with an asymmetric key pair in which only one of the keys, the private key,must be kept secret by one of the communicating parties; the other party uses the pairedkey, the public key. Because this second key need not be kept secret, the distributionproblem is supposedly solved: one party can create the key pair and send the public half inthe clear over the network to any other party that needs to communicate with it. The holderof the private key is the only party than can decrypt information sent by holders of thepaired public key.
Key Point
Unfortunately, in most realistic uses of public key cryptography, the key distribution problem is
no simpler than the symmetric key-sharing problem due to the need to distribute and performa trusted installation of a common authority certiﬁcate.
The issue is that the ability to successfully encrypt data on one end and decrypt it successfully
on another end is not sufﬁcient by itself. At least one of the endpoints usually requires proofthat a message is coming from a speciﬁc, “known-good” party. For example, before a shopperwill send credit card information over the World Wide Web to a merchant, he wants assurancethat he is indeed sending this private data to the merchant and not a malicious entityimpersonating the merchant. The merchant sends its public key to be used for the encryption,but how does this shopper know that the merchant (and only the merchant) actually holds thepublic key’s private other half? A man-in-the-middle eavesdropping on the network cansubstitute the merchant’s public key with her own public key, and then the credit cardinformation is easily stolen by the intruder. Thus, in most applications, the public key must beauthenticated prior to use. The common mechanism for public key authentication, which wedescribe later, requires an attestation of the public key by an authority that both endpointsmutually trust. In such a system, the purchaser must hold a priori a copy of the trustedauthority’s public key which is used to validate the merchant’s public key. In other words, theproblem of physically distributing symmetric keys has been replaced with the problem ofphysically distributing the authority’s public key! The bootstrapping problem remains234 Chapter 4

--- Page 245 ---
signiﬁcant. Nevertheless, public key cryptography, as we soon discuss, is critically important in
many protection schemes due to its asymmetric nature.
To reiterate, in public key cryptography, as shown in Figure 4.20 , the sender and receiver of
a message have two distinct, but paired, keys: the encryption key, which is made public; and the
decryption key, which is known only by the receiver. We term the encryption key the public key(PK); and its paired key, the private receiver key (PRK).
Any transmitter wishing to send a message to a particular receiver enciphers the message with
the PK and sends the ciphertext over an insecure channel; only the intended receiver, who hasexclusive knowledge of the PRK, can decipher the message.
The mathematics of public key cryptography is such that knowledge of either the PK or PRK
by an adversary is insufﬁcient to determine the other paired key. In addition, public keycryptography allows use of the private decryption key to encipher a message and for the publicencryption key to decipher it. This property is very useful for origin authentication: anyoneholding PK can decrypt (verify) the message, and successful decryption proves that themessage originated from the holder of the unique, private PRK.
The mathematics of public key cryptography requires knowledge of basic number theory,
modular arithmetic, and elliptic curve arithmetic. While we do not cover this math in detail inthis book, it is very important to understand public key concepts and how they are derived andimplemented. These concepts are described in the following sections.
Public key cryptography is based on special mathematical functions that are relatively easy to
calculate but very difﬁcult to invert. Thus, these special functions are called one-way functions .
Some examples of these special mathematical functions are
Factoring the product of two large prime numbers: It
 is easy to compute the product of
two prime numbers, but there is no known method to factor the primes other than by tryingall possible combinations to arrive at the primes themselves; the RSA algorithm (named
Figure 4.20:
Public key encryption/decryption.Embedded Cryptography 235

--- Page 246 ---
after Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) uses this method. A major advantage of RSA is its
simplicity, which promotes sound implementation.
Discrete algorithms: It is easy to raise a number to a large exponent but difﬁcult to
calculate the discrete logarithm; the Difﬁe-Hellman algorithm uses this method and is alsoelegant in its simplicity.
Elliptic curves: It is easy to compute the scalar point multiplication but very difﬁcult to
obtain the inverse; elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) uses this method.
For these special mathematical functions, inversion is possible only if the function containsatrapdoor
function , a term coined by Difﬁe and Hellman. The trapdoor acts as the key to
unlock what would otherwise be a one-way, non-reversible transformation. These trap doorsmust be well constructed and formulated when the public key pair (PK and PRK) is developed.For example, it is easy to multiply two very large prime numbers (each made up of 500 to 2,000
or more binary digits), but factoring the product of these two prime numbers is computationally
infeasible without a trapdoor.
4.7.1 RSA
Let’s consider P and Q, two 500-digit prime numbers, and N ¼P * Q. N is called the modulus
in the RSA public key algorithm. Given publicly disclosed N and secret P and Q, it would take
approximately ﬁve billion years to factor P and Q on a computer that can execute two billioninstructions per second.
However, if a better method to factor RSA moduli is discovered, then this time could be drastically
reduced. Of course, the steady increases in computer speeds have consistently increased the size ofkeys that can be recovered with brute-force factorization. For example, as of this writing, RSA-768(RSA requiring factoring of a 768-bit modulus to break) is no longer secure.
13While factoring
768-bit moduli may seem impressive in the 2010s most likely you, the reader, are having a littlechuckle at this feat if you are reading in the 2020s. The rate of increase in modulus sizefactorization between 1991 and 2010 is shown in Figure 4.21 . Most systems in use in 2012 employ
1,024 digits or greater RSA keys. However, cryptographers believe that a 1,024-bit modulus isalready nearing (or at) its end of life as a safe choice. NIST recommends the use of 2,048-bitmoduli and anticipates this choice will remain safe at least until the year 2030.
14
4.7.2 Equivalent Key Strength
Key Point
The cryptography community traditionally estimates the cryptographic strength corresponding to
key lengths of public key and other algorithms as a measure of bits of strength in a symmetric keyalgorithm, such as AES.236 Chapter 4

--- Page 247 ---
For example, a 3,072-bit RSA key is estimated to have equivalent strength to 128-bit AES.
Key Point
NIST special publication 800-57 provides estimates on the length of keys for particular algo-
rithms based on the length of time the data needs to be protected.
These quanta anticipate that compute power and/or improved cracking techniques will render
the previous generation key lengths inadequate. NIST equivalent key strength for commonsymmetric and public key cryptosystems is summarized in Table 4.5 .
Figure 4.21:
RSA modulus factorization over time.
Table 4.5: NIST equivalent key strength
Bits of Security Symmetric RSA/DH ECC
128 AES-128 3072 256
192 AES-192 7680 384
256 AES-256 15360 512Embedded Cryptography 237

--- Page 248 ---
4.7.3 Trapdoor Construction
We illustrate the trapdoor construction process using the RSA algorithm. Two important
modular arithmetic properties are as follows:
Given primes P ;Q and N ¼P/C3Q and W ¼ðP/C01Þ/C3ðQ/C01Þ:
X^Yðmod N Þ¼X^ðYðmod WÞÞ
ððX^Yðmod N ÞÞ^ZÞðmod N Þ¼X^ðY/C3ZÞðmod N Þ
For encryption and decryption to take place, the trap door is constructed by choosing a randominteger, E, between 3 and W that has no common factors with W. We now ﬁnd an integer, D,that is the inverse of E modulo W. In modulo notation, this inverse is expressed as follows:
ðD
/C3EÞðmod WÞ¼ 1
Integers E and N are public; W is discarded once E and D are computed; all other quantities aresecret.
Given these parameters, the RSA encryption operation is deﬁned as follows:
CTT¼PTT
^Eðmod N Þ
The decryption operation is as follows:
PTR¼CTR^Dðmod N Þ;where CTR ¼CTT
The modular arithmetic and choice of E and D prove that PTR ¼¼PTT as follows:
PTR¼CTR^Dðmod N Þ
¼ð ðPTT^Eðmod N ÞÞ^DÞðmod N Þ
¼PTT^ðE/C3DÞðmod N Þ
¼PTT^ððE/C3DÞðmod WÞÞ
¼PTT^1
¼PTT
Given the selected E, D is the trapdoor that allows the decrypted cipher to match the plaintext.The following example demonstrates the mathematics with simple numbers:
Let P ¼3;Q¼11;N¼P
/C3Q¼33;W¼ðP/C01Þ/C3ðQ/C01Þ¼2/C310¼20
Randomly choose a number E that is relatively prime (no common factors) to W ¼20. W’s
factors are 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, and 20. Therefore, choices for E are 3, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17, and 19. We
randomly select E ¼7. In modulo arithmetic, we compute D such that (E*D) (mod W) ¼1.
Thus, D ¼3. Let PTT ¼2.238 Chapter 4

--- Page 249 ---
Encryption :PTT^Eðmod N Þ¼2^7ðmod 33 Þ¼128ð mod 33 Þ¼29ðCTTÞ
Decryption :CTR^Dðmod N Þ¼29^3ðmod 33 Þ¼23;389ð mod 33 Þ¼2ðPTTÞ
Because in practice, very large integers, often called bignums by cryptography practitioners,
are used for the public and private portions of a key, public key cryptography is
a computationally intensive process. For example, for RSA-2048, the modulus N used duringthe encryption is a 2,048-bit bignum. In general, public key algorithms are at least 1,000 timesslower than symmetric algorithms using keys of relatively equal strength.
Key Point
Because of its computational inefﬁciency relative to symmetric key, public key cryptography is
generally not used for encryption and decryption, particularly for the bulk processing of data,such as in a VPN session or full-disk encryption device. Public key cryptography, however, ispreferred for digital signatures (providing origin authentication) as well as for the secure distri-bution of ephemeral symmetric keys.
These ephemeral keys are called session keys and are created through a public key exchange,
orkey agreement, between two parties. The parties then use the secret session key to protect the
conﬁdentiality of trafﬁc sent during the communications session.
4.8 Key Agreement
As shown in Figure 4.22 , properly applied cryptography provides a scheme to develop a secret
key shared between two cooperating entities.
Initially, the two parties, whom we call Alice and Bob, do not share any common cryptographic
secret. Both Alice and Bob generate an ephemeral public key pair and send the public portionto each other. Both Alice and Bob, using their own key pair and the newly received public keyhalf, develop two distinct shared secrets as well as a combined common secret. The algorithmused to develop the shared secret is called a key agreement algorithm . This secret is used to
Figure 4.22:
Shared secret key creation.Embedded Cryptography 239

--- Page 250 ---
derive a one-time session key, kept private to only Alice and Bob. The session key is used as the
symmetric key for keystream or codebook encryption.
TheDifﬁe-Hellman algorithm is the most common key agreement algorithm. To illustrate the
key agreement concept using Difﬁe-Hellman, let’s assume that Alice creates a public key pair
in which E1 is the public key, and D1 is the private key. Similarly, Bob creates E2 and D2.Public Difﬁe-Hellman parameters G and P are known in advance to Bob and Alice (forexample, an overall key agreement protocol may include transmitting G and P between Aliceand Bob). E1 and E2 are computed as follows:
Alice :E1¼G
^D1ðmod P Þ;Alice sends E1 to Bob
Bob :E2¼G^D2ðmod P Þ;Bob sends E2 to Alice
Both Alice and Bob then compute the shared secret as follows:
Alice :S1¼E2^D1ðmod P Þ
¼ð ðG^D2ðmod P ÞÞ^D1Þðmod P Þ
¼ðG^ðD2/C3D1ÞÞðmod P Þ
Bob :S2¼E1^D2ðmod P Þ
¼ð ðG^D1ðmod P ÞÞ^D2Þðmod P Þ
¼ðG^ðD1/C3D2ÞÞðmod P Þ
Thus ;S1¼S2
The resultant shared secret S ¼¼S1¼¼S2 was calculated independently within Alice’s and
Bob’s respective computing devices and kept secret. Because S depends on the private portionsof Alice’s and Bob’s ephemeral key pairs, no other entity is able to compute the same sharedsecret. The S1 and S2 results are shortened in a speciﬁed manner and used as the secret sessionkey for symmetric cryptography.
Key Point
Difﬁe-Hellman is an important algorithm because it enables perfect forward secrecy to be
achieved by network security protocols: session keys cannot be compromised even if other sessionkeys or one of the long-term private keys used for origin authentication is compromised.
Because Difﬁe-Hellman does not itself provide for any origin authentication, it is considered
an anonymous agreement algorithm.
Key Point
Digital signature functionality must be added to a protocol that employs Difﬁe-Hellman to be
able to use its key agreement for secure peer-to-peer communications.240 Chapter 4

--- Page 251 ---
Such is the case with IKE and TLS, common network security protocols discussed in
Chapter 5.
4.8.1 Man-in-the-Middle Attack on Difﬁe-Hellman
The classic Difﬁe-Hellman key agreement scheme suffers from man-in-the-middle attack
vulnerabilities. One such attack is shown in Figure 4.23 .
Since Alice’s and Bob’s ephemeral public keys are made public, an adversary, Mallory, who is anactive eavesdropper, can intercept them and introduce his own public key for distribution to Aliceand Bob. Alice computes a shared session key, AMK, that Mallory is able to compute, and Bobcomputes a different shared key, BMK, that Mallory too can compute. Trafﬁc originating fromAlice is decrypted by Mallory using AMK and re-encrypted with BMK and sent to Bob. Similarly,trafﬁc from Bob is decrypted using BMK and re-encrypted using AMK. As a result, Mallory cannow read all trafﬁc between Alice and Bob without their knowledge of the deception.
To prevent this attack, we must ensure that the Difﬁe-Hellman ephemeral public keys are
actually generated by Alice and Bob and not by an adversary. We say that the public keys mustbeauthenticated .
4.9 Public Key Authentication
There are many modern methods of public key authentication, including
Publishing all public keys to a trusted key server: Th e key server’s database is essentially
a whitelist of pre-authenticated clients. All clients are able to communicate with the keyserver on a secure (encrypted and authenticated) channel using pre-exchanged public keys.If Alice wants to send Bob an authenticated message, then Alice signs the message and sendsit to the key server. Bob asks the key server to validate the message. The key server performsthe authentication using Alice’s public key and then informs Bob over the secure channelbetween Bob and the server. With this approach, each endpoint needs to have a pre-established, authenticated public key only for the key server, not for all other endpoints. Thedownside is that all messages must pass through the trusted key server. Another downside isrisk to availability: if the server goes down, no messages can be authenticated.
Figure 4.23:
Man-in-the-middle attack on Difﬁe-Hellman.Embedded Cryptography 241

--- Page 252 ---
Sending public keys using a pre-established, authenticated secure channel: Instead of
a whitelist, the key server initially possesses no public keys. Each client must register its
public key dynamically using the secure connection it has with the key server.
Embedding the public key in a digital envelope signed by a mutually trusted third party:The public key is concatenated with identity/attribute data of a user and the result cryp-tographically signed by the third party using the third party’s secret signature key; thissigned envelope is known as a public key certiﬁcate. The certiﬁcate binds this user identity
to its public key. Thus, signature veriﬁcation using this public key provides assurance thatthe signed data originated from the associated identity. Each client must have pre-installedthe public key, called the root certiﬁcate , of the trusted third-party signature authority,
called the certiﬁcation authority (CA).
Having a mutually trusted entity (web of trust) vouch for the public keys: Instead of
a single certiﬁcate authority for a large set of clients, authorization is decentralized. Any
endpoint can vouch for a public key by signing it, and multiple endpoints can vouch for the
same key. A policy decision is made locally regarding whether to trust a public key, for
example, based on the number of signatures. Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) is a samplecryptosystem that uses the web of trust concept.
The most common approach used for trusted distribution of public keys is to use certiﬁcates signedbya
trusted certiﬁcation authority (CA); use of a CA usually requires a public key infrastructure
(PKI) used to manage the life cycle of certiﬁcates across all endpoints that share the CA.
The United States National Security Agency (NSA) operates such a PKI for securing classiﬁed
information. NSA generates the public key pair for all entities and issues the private key andassociated public key certiﬁcate to its registered users through a secure distribution process.Other sovereign governments employ similar centralized key generation.
Commercial certiﬁcate authorities such as VeriSign use a different approach to PKI:
usually the public signatures of commercial CAs are embedded in browsers or other localstorage of an endpoint device. Endpoints generate their own public key pair and havea CA sign the endpoint-generated certiﬁcate containing the endpoint’s CA-veriﬁed identityand public key. The endpoint registration/signing process may use e-mail or some othercommunications method between endpoint and CA. The CA never sees the endpoints’secret keys.
4.9.1 Certiﬁcate Types
X.509 is the most prevalent standardized format for public key certiﬁcates. RFC 5280 deﬁnesthe latest standard, X.509v3.
15For embedded systems that must securely communicate with
other systems not directly controlled by the embedded vendor, X.509 certiﬁcates and a third-party CA will be commonly used.242 Chapter 4

--- Page 253 ---
NSA Suite B guidance for the use of public key certiﬁcates is documented in RFC 5759.16
Key Point
NSA Suite B speciﬁes the use of X.509 v3 certiﬁcates using elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)-
based digital signatures.
4.9.1.1 Custom Certiﬁcate Approaches for Embedded Systems
For embedded systems whose peers can be more directly controlled (need not interoperate
with arbitrary endpoints), other certiﬁcate formats can be used. In particular, some highlymemory-constrained embedded systems may ﬁnd the storage requirements for a minimumset of X.509 certiﬁcates, each of which may be on the order of 1KB in size, to beprohibitive.
Some resource-constrained embedded systems have adopted implicit certiﬁcates , in which the
public key is reconstructed from the certiﬁcate. The implicit certiﬁcate is the same size as the
public key. In the case of elliptic curve cryptography, this results in a certiﬁcate that is farsmaller than a traditional X.509 certiﬁcate.
A well-known elliptic curve implicit certiﬁcate system is Elliptic Curve Qu-Vanstone
(ECQV).
17
The user of an implicit certiﬁcate computes the public key from the public key’s associatedidentity and the certiﬁcate authority’s public key (which is typically pre-installed) and thenuses it in some public key operation (e.g., Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm, orECDSA). The operation succeeds only if the public key is valid; hence, we call this approachimplicitly certiﬁed.
At the time of this writing, the Certicom division of RIM has an unexpired patent on ECQV ,
making its use a barrier to most embedded systems developers.
Key Point
In some cases, the embedded systems designer may beneﬁt from a cryptographic vendor who can
provide custom, resource-optimized certiﬁcates.
For example, an optimized certiﬁcate may include a statically deﬁned format of binary
identiﬁcation information, public key, and signature. Such a format will also be signiﬁcantlysmaller than a typical X.509 certiﬁcate. Embedded systems designers should consult theirsystems software/cryptography supplier to understand the choices available.Embedded Cryptography 243

--- Page 254 ---
4.10 Elliptic Curve Cryptography
Despite the security and ubiquity of RSA, NSA Suite B speciﬁes elliptic curve
cryptography (ECC) for public key functionality. The reason is efﬁciency. According toNIST SP 800-57, a 224-bit ECC key used for digital signatures is equivalent in strength toRSA-2048.
Key Point
While the performance difference between RSA and elliptic curve algorithms with their
respective contemporary key sizes is not dramatic, ECC provides better security strength efﬁ-ciency per bit and therefore is deemed by NSA and most cryptographers as the superior long-term choice.
For example, after the year 2030, the NIST recommendation for ECC key length is 256 bits,
just 14% higher than the pre-2030 guidance. But the RSA recommendation (3072) is 50%higher than the pre-2030 guidance.
ECC employs mathematics that is more complicated than RSA, leading to more complex
implementations, which is another reason why some still prefer RSA. Another reason for thelack of rapid ECC adoption is the fear of RIM’s ECC patents (obtained via acquisition ofCerticom).
Key Point
While some implementation options for ECC are covered by patents, all major
cryptographic toolkit vendors (as well as the open source OpenSSL developers) have created
ECC implementations that follow public speciﬁcations and are believed to be free from patentrisk.
Yet another reason for the lack of ECC adoption is legacy inertia: many deployed computer
systems and certiﬁcation authorities (even within the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD),whose cryptographic policies are controlled by the NSA) are set up to use RSA keys andRSA-based digital certiﬁcates.
Key Point
For embedded systems that operate on networks using legacy RSA-based PKI, ECC cannot be
practically used until these infrastructures are upgraded to use ECC.
The conversion from RSA to ECC within the U.S. DoD is ongoing.244 Chapter 4

--- Page 255 ---
4.10.1 Elliptic Curve Digital Signatures
The digital signature algorithm for ECC is called Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
(ECDSA) and is the lone digital signature algorithm in NSA Suite B.
When making a decision regarding whether to use ECC or RSA, embedded systems designers
need to consider the length of in-ﬁeld deployment and whether NSA-approval may be required(in which case Suite B is a safe bet).
4.10.2 Elliptic Curve Anonymous Key Agreement
Like RSA, Difﬁe-Hellman is not in Suite B. Rather, Suite B speciﬁes Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman (ECDH), which computes the ephemeral public/private key pairs based on ellipticcurves instead of exponentials. Like RSA and ECDSA, the Suite B preference for ECDH lies inits relative bit efﬁciency. Interestingly, a different algorithm, ECMQV , used to be in Suite Binstead of ECDH. While ECMQV is known to be more performance efﬁcient than ECDH, theNSA was unable to satisfactorily resolve patent encumbrances of ECMQV. Although there isno technical requirement to use them together, generally speaking, if an embedded designchooses RSA and requires key agreement, DH is typically used. And if a design uses ECDSA,then ECDH would be used.
For all elliptic curve algorithms, NSA Suite B guidance stipulates speciﬁc curves that also
imply key lengths. For top-secret information, 384-bit keys are required. For secret and below,256-bit or 384-bit keys can be used. To meet NIST recommendations, ECDSA and ECDHrequire key lengths of at least 224 bits until 2030 and 256 bits thereafter (until the nextguidance revision).
4.11 Cryptographic Hashes
Public keys are very large (usually thousands of bits), and their secure physical distribution andmanual installation are cumbersome. A common practice is to electronically distribute thepublic key but physically distribute a ﬁngerprint of the public key. This ﬁngerprint is calledahash , as shown in Figure 4.24 :
The hash is used to verify the authenticity and integrity of the public key.
A hash algorithm converts an arbitrary stream of bits into a ﬁxed-length message, the hash
value. Cryptographic hashes should be true one-way functions; in other words, given anarbitrary hash value h, it should be computationally infeasible to determine any message whose
hash value matches h. Cryptographic hashes should also be resistant to collisions; in other
words, given a message, m, and its hash value, h, it should be computationally infeasible to ﬁnd
another message, different from m,that also has a hash value of h. A related property toEmbedded Cryptography 245

--- Page 256 ---
collision resistance is randomness; the hash function should act as a random function while still
being efﬁcient to compute. These cryptographic hash properties ensure that attackers cannotmodify a hash without being detected by anyone possessing the original message and alsoensure that the attacker cannot derive any information about the original message given just thehash.
Cryptographic hashes, by themselves, are most often used for data integrity protection and
tamper or fault detection. For example, the authors of a security-critical software productshould generate cryptographic hashes of the software images that make up the product and thensecurely distribute these hashes to the software’s end users. The end user can generate the hashupon software delivery and compare the hash to the known-good value to ensure that thesoftware has not been modiﬁed prior to receipt. The same hash veriﬁcation can be performed atboot time in a ﬁelded product to ensure that the contents of memory being used to store thesoftware have not been corrupted.
4.11.1 Secure Hash Algorithm
The Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)-1 has been a historically popular hash algorithm thatgenerates a 160-bit digest. SHA-1 has suffered from collision weakness discoveries. InFebruary 2005, researchers reported narrowing the collision search space to 2
^69computations,
well below the brute-force strength of 2^80computations.18In August of the same year, an
improvement to the attack reduced the timing complexity to 2^63.19Since then, several
Figure 4.24:
Using a hash to reduce the size of delivered public keys.246 Chapter 4

--- Page 257 ---
researchers have claimed to reduce the complexity further, in the area of 2^57computations.
Because of its fruitful cryptanalytic properties, SHA-1 should be relegated only to basic data-
integrity-checking responsibilities.
SHA-1’s current replacement is SHA-2, a family of hash algorithms with a selection of result
bit lengths that are used to further qualify the algorithm name: SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384,and SHA-512. Note that SHA-1 produces a 160-bit result. NIST is in the ﬁnal stages ofselecting SHA-3 through a public algorithm competition. The winner should be proclaimed in2012. SHA-1 and SHA-2 algorithm families are speciﬁed in FIPS 180-2.
20
NSA Suite B stipulates the use of SHA-384 for top-secret information and the use of SHA-256or SHA-384 for secret and below. In contrast, NIST guidance states that SHA-224 is sufﬁcientfor general-purpose products until the year 2030.
4.11.2 MMO
While SHA variants are the only NIST- and FIPS-approved hash algorithms, they are by nomeans the only popular ones. For example, the Matyas-Meyer-Oseas algorithm, typically usedwith AES (AES-MMO), is an interesting algorithm used in ZigBee. The nice thing aboutMMO is that it executes quickly and with negligible memory overhead when the embeddedprocessor already has an ofﬂoad engine for the underlying encryption algorithm. The followingsample C code implementation shows the simplicity of MMO:
// This is the Matyas-Meyer-Oseas hash algorithm applied to the AES block
// cipher. The algorithm is standardized in ISO/IEC 10118-2.// This implementation uses AES-ECB-128 in order to match the keysize
// with the AES block size (avoiding a transformation of intermediate blocks
// to a different key size for AES). The initialization vector must also// be of length equal to the AES block size. Finally, this implementation
// requires that the input plaintext be of length equal to a multiple of
// the AES block size (no padding is performed).// The output tag is the contents of the final output block, of size equal to
// the AES block size.
void AesMmo(const uint32_t *iv, const uint32_t *pt, uint32_t len,
uint32_t *tag)
{
uint32_t i = 0;blk *key = (blk *)tag;const blk *ptb = (blk *)pt;
assert((len % AES_BLOCK_SIZE) == 0);
for (*key = *(blk *)iv; i < len / AES_BLOCK_SIZE; i++) {
AesEcbEncrypt(&ptb[i], key);
XORBLK(key, &ptb[i], key); // 128-bit XOR (ptb ^ key)
}
}Embedded Cryptography 247

--- Page 258 ---
4.12 Message Authentication Codes
Message Authentication Codes, or MACs, provide both integrity protection and origin
authentication, and hence are associated with a private key, much like a symmetric encryptionalgorithm. A MAC takes as input this private key and a message, and similar to a hash function,generates a digest (the authentication code). The recipient of a message and its authenticationcode executes the same algorithm with the same pre-shared private key. If the codes are equal,this implies not only that the message arrived intact, but also that the message must have beenhashed using the same private key.
In a network security protocol such as IPsec, a MAC may be used to provide integrity
protection and origin authentication of messages sent between two peers that have previouslyestablished a shared private key.
While there are numerous MAC algorithms (CBC-MAC is described earlier in this chapter),
thekeyed-hash algorithm, HMAC, is the most common.
While HMAC using an SHA-1 hash, referred to as HMAC-SHA-1, does not suffer from thecollision weaknesses discovered in SHA-1, the SHA-2 variants of HMAC (e.g., HMAC-SHA-256) are required by Suite B and are the best choice for most modern embedded designs. HMAC
is a simple and elegant algorithm, deﬁned (equivalently) in RFC 2104 and FIPS 198.
21,22
4.13 Random Number Generation
Many cryptographic algorithms require the use of random numbers. For example, RSA and
ECC keys must be generated with random numbers to ensure uniqueness. When lots of bits are
required, pseudo-random number generator (PRNG) algorithms can be used, as long as they
are seeded with a true random number generator (TRNG), usually derived from a naturalentropy source in hardware. Just to keep the acronym soup ﬂowing, another term used by FIPSfor PRNG is deterministic random bit generator (DRBG).
Key Point
Of critical import to embedded systems designers is the requirement that they use an embedded
processor with a true random number generator (TRNG).
Without such a feature in the processor, designers will ﬁnd it challenging to locate sources of
entropy for a TRNG and to prove that the approach is valid. Most embedded processors withsecurity engines of any sort will have a TRNG. However, buyer beware: some hardwaresecurity engines that are documented to generate “random numbers” may actually beoutputting pseudo-random numbers using deterministic algorithms. It is necessary to validate248 Chapter 4

--- Page 259 ---
that random numbers are truly random. One way to do this, other than having the NSA evaluate
the TRNG, is to test the TRNG with a FIPS- or NIST-approved random number test.23
4.13.1 True Random Number Generation
A non-deterministic randomizer uses an unpredictable process, rather than a speciﬁedalgorithm, to produce an output. The output of a non-deterministic randomizer cannot bedetermined even if an attacker possesses or determines the complete randomizer design,including internal state information at any particular time. From a conceptual view, a non-deterministic randomizer consists of one or more sources of entropy and a combining functionto produce a uniformly distributed random output, as shown in Figure 4.25 .
As shown, the N-bit random output is totally unpredictable; the probability of producinga speciﬁc random number is 1 / 2^n, where n is the number of bits in the random output. Theprobability should remain at 1 / 2^n even if an attacker has complete knowledge of the previousrandom number produced by the randomizer and has complete knowledge of the randomizerdesign and implementation.
The entropy source is the basis for the non-deterministic operation of the randomizer. Many
physical components and processes can serve as acceptable entropy sources. Examples includering oscillators, noise diodes, radioactive decay, and high-bandwidth signal noise in electronicdevices. Entropy sources that can be implemented using digital logic are very useful since theycan be synthesized with programmable arrays (FPGAs) or custom application-speciﬁc
Figure 4.25:
Entropy input to a combining function used to create true random output.Embedded Cryptography 249

--- Page 260 ---
integrated circuits ASICs dand available for the embedded systems developer to use within an
applications processor or adjunct co-processor. While most embedded systems developers
reading this book can simply take advantage of this hardware and need not understand thedetails of a true random number generator implementation, the following case study isprovided for those who wish to augment their base cryptographic knowledge and depth.
4.13.1.1 Case Study: Ring Oscillator-based RandomizerRing oscillators have been thoroughly studied and modeled. The entropy source of ring
oscillators is the variation in delay, or jitter, across the circuit, causing the state of the ring to be
unpredictable. Readers unfamiliar with the concept of a ring oscillator should take a moment toread any of the commonly found descriptions, such as Wikipedia, available on the Internet.
Figure 4.26 presents a ring oscillator with three delay elements: D
0,D1,a n dD 2.E a c hd e l a y
element consists of a simple logic inverter, except for the ﬁrst, D 0, which uses a NAND gate to
multiplex an external enable line that holds the ring oscillator in a steady state prior to oscillation.When enabled, the ring oscillator has 2N states, where N is the number of delay elements in the
ring. A timing diagram of this three-stage ring oscillator is shown in Figure 4.27 .
In the diagram in Figure 4.27 ,D
nrepresent the delay elements, P is the period, and d is the
delay of one element. Only a single delay element changes state at a time; thus, the ringoscillator produces a square wave output that is regular when viewed over a short interval.However, over a longer period, drift and jitter cause the ring oscillator to be less predictable,especially if the jitter is greater than the period of the oscillator. Although not proven here, itcan be shown that the next state of a ring oscillator S
1after time T, discounting any jitter, is
related to the initial state S 0by the following equation:
S1=( S 0+ T/d) mod (2N)
For example, if d ¼5 ns, N ¼5, S 0¼0, and T ¼500,000 ns (a long sample), then S 1is (0þ
500,000 / 5) mod 10 ¼0. With jitter, the next state is
S1=( S 0+ (T + J)/d) mod (2N)
Jitter, J, is deﬁned as the peak variation in time required for the oscillator to complete N cyclesand varies randomly with noise due to temperature and voltage changes within transistors
Figure 4.26:
Three-element ring oscillator.250 Chapter 4

--- Page 261 ---
(seeFigure 4.28 ). The preceding equation shows that increased jitter causes the next state to be
unpredictable.
In fact, the time T between samples has a direct effect on the amount of jitter that accumulates
between samples. It can also be shown that depending on the peak jitter, J, after time T, thedelay d, and the ring oscillator period P, if J is close to d and smaller than P, the next state wouldhave small variations. But if J is greater than P, the output states exhibit large variation. We candeduce that a single ring oscillator could be used to produce random data as long as we sampleit after a long period of time, making sure that J is greater than P. This approach would result inan unacceptably slow sample rate. In practice, a randomizer uses many ring oscillatorssummed together to form its output to avoid long sample rates. For example, Figure 4.29 shows
two simple ring oscillators made up of two and three states.
A set of combined oscillators, each with an intentionally varied quantity of stages, is called
aleg. Furthermore, multiple legs can be combined to create the ﬁnal randomizer. When jitter is
added to each leg of the randomizer and the magnitude of jitter is random and variable betweenlegs, it can be easily observed that the combined output produces more oscillations, resulting ina random binary stream when sampled over time.
To use the preceding randomizer for classiﬁed or sensitive data, it must be secure and fail-safe.
For example, if a randomizer composed of 20 ring oscillators with a varying number of delay
Figure 4.27:
Timing diagram for three-element ring oscillator.Embedded Cryptography 251

--- Page 262 ---
elements suffers failure in a few legs, it could result in an output that is biased (no longer
random). To ensure that randomness is retained in the midst of multiple failures, practicaldesigns use a post-processing phase that takes as input the summed output of all the legs as wellas the individual leg outputs, as shown in Figure 4.30 .
Each leg has enough entropy to provide a random bit stream; therefore, even if a leg fails, thecombined output would produce a random stream at the proper sampling rate. However,because a reasonably short sample rate is often required, each randomizer leg must be testedindividually to rule out statistical biases.
Figure 4.29:
Randomizer with two distinct ring oscillators.
Figure 4.28:
Jitter.252 Chapter 4

--- Page 263 ---
The processor sampling the outputs calculates the sum of the individual bit streams from each
leg and compares to the randomizer output. If they do not match, a failure has been detectedand an alarm is raised. In addition, the processor reads and aggregates N bits from each leg andfrom the combined output, and calculates the number of set bits in each N-bit stream. Theprocessor uses probability theory to detect an inordinate quantity of set bits. For example, fora 256-bit stream, the allowable range of set bits may be 112 to 144. If all streams contain anacceptable number of set bits, then the test passes. Of course, there is a small probability ofa false negative. When this occurs, a new set of data should be taken and tested. Based onprobability theory, if numerous (e.g., six) sets of data fail the set bit range test, then a failure isdeemed statistically assured and an alarm is raised; otherwise, the sampled data is used as therandom bit stream.
The preceding test does not detect all types of bias failures in a randomizer. Randomness tests
can be run at power up or periodically (e.g., once a year), sampling far more bits (e.g.,a million) and looking for additional anomalies, such as improbably long strings of the same bitvalue.
Practical randomizers use both a non-deterministic randomizer (ring oscillators) combined
with a linear function such as the SHA-1 hash to produce the ﬁnal output, as shown inFigure 4.31 .
This approach generates a smaller output given a set of random bits from the dual-legrandomizer. The hash output could be stored in memory for subsequent use in the creation ofcryptographic keys. Using a hashed stream smoothes biases that might slip through the ringoscillators.
In summary, randomizers using ring oscillators must be carefully designed and implemented to
make sure that they are truly random and incorporate built-in redundancy and error detection.The design of a randomizer must make sure that each leg has enough entropy (jitter) to produce
Figure 4.30:
Redundant oscillator outputs.Embedded Cryptography 253

--- Page 264 ---
a random bit stream. Ring lock-ups must be avoided, and each leg must produce an
independent jitter with no affect on other legs. Adequate short-term and long-term tests mustbe performed to make sure the randomizer is fail-safe.
4.13.2 Pseudo-Random Number Generation
A deterministic randomizer produces an output based on a speciﬁc algorithm and nota probabilistic process such as a ring oscillator. As such, these types of deterministicrandomizers or pseudo-random randomizers, while appearing to produce random bit streams,yield output that is totally predictable given a known initial state.
Key Point
Pseudo-random number generators, seeded by true random input, are required for applications
that must generate cryptographic random material at a rate higher than can be created by
a system’s local true random number generator.
Key Point
A PRNG that is not properly seeded with true random input should never be used for the creation
of private keys.
Periodically, during the operation of a TRNG, a new seed must be generated and input to the
PRNG. If the algorithm is carefully designed, a deterministic randomizer will pass traditional
Figure 4.31:
Use of a hash function to narrow randomizer output.254 Chapter 4

--- Page 265 ---
statistical tests. Certiﬁcation authorities (e.g., NSA, FIPS) will execute such randomness tests
to validate PRNGs. PRNG algorithms can have a range in complexity, from linear congruentialgenerators (LCGs) using modular arithmetic to combinations of encryption and hashalgorithms.
Pseudo-random number generators must be carefully designed to avoid generating linear
output that can be easily broken. PRNGS must use non-linear algorithms such as an AES-basedkeystream generator.
Key Point
A safe choice of PRNG is an FIPS-approved algorithm, such as those published in NIST Special
Publication 800-90.
The list of FIPS-approved DRBGs can be found in Annex C of the FIPS 140-2 standard.24
4.13.2.1 NIST Special Publication 800-90
The most modern entries on the FIPS-approved list are the algorithms found in NIST Special
Publication 800-90, published in 2007 and updated in May 2011 with a draft revision, SP 800-90A.
25A couple of the more popular algorithms from this standard are discussed in the
following sections. Note that the following algorithms’ speciﬁcations match pseudo-randombit generators deﬁned in ANSI X9.82, Part 3 Deterministic Random Bit Generators.
26
4.13.2.1.1 HMAC_DRBG
HMAC_DRBG, as the name implies, uses the HMAC message authentication code algorithmto generate pseudo-random numbers. Variations of HMAC_DRBG use different HMACalgorithms (e.g., HMAC-SHA1 versus HMAC-SHA-256) and should be assumed to havecommensurate relative strength. The typical interfaces to the DRBG are as follows:
Instantiate: This method
 initializes the DRBG given true random input (entropy) of
appropriate minimum bits.
Generate: The core of the algorithm invokes the HMAC algorithm several times serially,
using the entropy as input at various stages. Each invocation of the generate functionoutputs a string of pseudo-random bits of length equal to the length of the underlying hashalgorithm. For HMAC-SHA-256, a 256-bit string of pseudo-random bits is generated.
Re-seed: Most implementations will provide a re-seed operation that takes a new entropy
input to refresh the internal state of the DRBG. The implementation may limit the numberof bits that can be generated without a re-seed invocation. Periodic re-seeding is viewed asgood policy to address the threat that the original entropy or internal DRBG state iscompromised.Embedded Cryptography 255

--- Page 266 ---
The HMAC_DRBG speciﬁcation lends itself to efﬁcient implementation, especially if the
embedded microprocessor already has hardware acceleration for hashing. An implementationof HMAC_DRBG may be as small as 100 lines of code, making it easy to understand andverify against the speciﬁcation.
4.13.2.1.2 CTR_DRBG
As its name suggests, CTR_DRBG uses a block cipher in counter mode to perform its bitjumbling. AES in Counter Mode (AES-CTR) is an obvious choice, especially if the systemalready incorporates AES-CTR for encryption. Similar to HMAC_DRBG, CTR_DRBG
requires true random input and is typically invoked using instantiate, generate, and re-seed
methods. One advantage of CTR_DRBG over HMAC_DRBG is that the algorithmic securityof an implementation of CTR_DRBG using AES reduces to the security of AES-CTR itself. Incontrast, pseudo-randomness is not an originally conceived property of hash functions.Therefore, the concern exists that a weakness could be found in HMAC_DRBG even if there isno weakness in the underlying hash. A weakness in CTR_DRBG would requirea corresponding weakness in AES-CTR.
Cryptography without true random numbers should be considered little more than obfuscation
that can be cracked by sophisticated attackers. Hackers allegedly compromised the SonyPlayStation 3 game console, claiming that the root of the subversion was caused by Sony’s useof the following random number generator function:
int getRandomNumber()
{
return 4;
}
Embedded systems developers: don’t let this happen to you! The attackers, from an
organization called failOverﬂow, presented their attack at the Chaos CommunicationCongress 2010. Because of this insecure random number generator, the attackers allegedlywere able to compute the private key used to sign boot images and then boot Linux ona PS3.
4.14 Key Management for Embedded Systems
As previously discussed, the security of a cryptographic system depends on the secrecy of theentirety of the system’s private keys. An adversary that obtains the key or a segment of the keywill, in general, be able to obtain the plaintext from actively generated or previously capturedciphertext. At ﬁrst glance, keeping keys secret seems simple: the source of the key (keygenerator) and the destination (user) are trusted agents instructed to protect the key as it travelsfrom its source to its ﬁnal destination within the embedded system. Many systems today rely onthis process for securing the keys. The keys are generated in plaintext form dsometimes called256 Chapter 4

--- Page 267 ---
red keys dand sent to the user by courier or by other secure means and then loaded into the
embedded system.
Once the key is loaded, many embedded systems do not bother to periodically change the keys.
It may be surprising to know that some critical banking systems in use today dfor example,
automated teller machines (ATMs) that use cryptography to protect card transactions ddo not
change the keys within the ATM unless a failure has occurred. And even then, the original keysare often reloaded!
4.14.1 Case Study: The Walker Spy Case
Another famous event in the annals of security and cryptography can basically be boiled downto poor key management. A U.S. government-classiﬁed system employed an overly simplistic
key management system that proved disastrous. The basic attack was as follows: a trusted key
administrator (John Anthony Walker, Jr.) replicated a set of red keys and gave them to anadversary, as shown in Figure 4.32 .
Of course, the attack could not have been perpetrated without the insider threat. Without doubt,protecting against insider threats is one of the biggest challenges to all forms of security.However, we demonstrate how proper key management would have made this insider attackmore difﬁcult, if not impossible, to perpetrate.
This example describes how the U.S. government broadcasts messages to U.S. submarines at
sea. Broadcast RF messages are sent from a ground-based broadcast station on U.S. soil to allthe submarines. The broadcast approach enables submarines positioned all over the world toobtain critical information concurrently and rapidly. Of course, some messages are highlyclassiﬁed, describing submarine positions, nuclear command and control messages, and othersecrets. Thus, the broadcasts must be strongly encrypted.
Figure 4.32:
Red key compromise.Embedded Cryptography 257

--- Page 268 ---
Because it must remain underwater for long periods of time, each submarine is provided, prior
to launch, a canister containing numerous red keys for use during a mission. The key list isprinted on paper tape, and each key is used only for a predetermined, limited amount oftimed for example, one day. The key is manually replaced with the next canister key at the end
of the day. Cryptographic custodians or administrators are responsible for making sure thateach key is properly loaded into the cryptographic communications units.
The system was compromised when one of the cryptographic custodians in a submarine,
John Anthony Walker, Jr., made an extra copy of the paper tape key list and sold the copyto the KGB. With possession of the copied keys, the Soviets were able to monitor anddecrypt all the messages sent by the broadcast station. Essentially, Soviet submarines wereable to impersonate U.S. submarines since they had the authentication mechanism: thebroadcast key used to decrypt all the messages. The daily key replacement policy wasgood: if a key were compromised, only messages encrypted and decrypted on theapplicable day would be at risk. However, i n this case, the threat wa s not an eavesdropper
trying to obtain the key, but rather an insider threat that leaked lots of keys withoutdetection for a long time.
This simple key management scheme of manually loading and reloading red keys by trusted
personnel resulted in a major cryptosystem failure, what many believe to be the worst case ofespionage in U.S. history and a loss of security that literally changed the balance of powerbetween the United States and the Soviet Union. This example highlights the criticalimportance of a robust key management system for any product using cryptography to protectdata, whether the data is classiﬁed, sensitive, or private. At a minimum, a key management planneeds to be articulated up front and presented, discussed, and approved prior to design orimplementation.
4.14.2 Key Management dGeneralized Model
Figure 4.33 presents a generalized infrastructure of embedded systems connected to
a communications medium (RF, Internet, t elephone switching system, private banking
network, etc.) in various communication modes, including duplex point-to-point, duplexpoint-to-multipoint, and simplex broadcast. In this model, all types of keys are requiredfor the various conﬁgurations and missions associated with these embedded devices. Tominimize human involvement and maximize automation in key management, themodel provides a trusted key server to act as the central key generator for all the requiredkeys.
This model addresses the complete life cycle of a key, from its creation to its destruction. The
process begins with embedded system registration and ends with key revocation (the embeddedsystem is no longer trusted, is destroyed, or is no longer in inventory).258 Chapter 4

--- Page 269 ---
(1) Registration Endpoint systems need to register to the key server, and this normally requires
an initial key load of some kind (symmetric or public key). If a symmetric key is required, it is
usually black (it should not be red). For symmetric keys, initial key loads should be done eitherat the factory or in a trusted facility prior to shipping on site. It is best that the initial key loadedis used only inside the embedded device and used strictly to decrypt an operational key eithersent by the key server or loaded initially in black form.
(2) Key Generation Some microprocessors provide a hardware-based one-time-programmable
(OTP) key generation function. In other cases, the embedded systems ﬁrmware installation
process can incorporate an internal key generation step. Key generation algorithms areincluded in most software or hardware cryptographic implementations.
Key Point
Ideally, private keys are born within and never leave the embedded system in which they are used.
Sometimes, however, private keys must be provisioned externally. For example, High-Deﬁnition Content Protection (HDCP) keys are licensed and distributed by Intel Corporation.How do these keys get securely transported from their originating trusted key generation serverto the target embedded system? Either the embedded system must be manually keyed bya locally trusted administrator (not a scalable solution), or the device must have the ability toestablish a secure connection (e.g., using IPsec or TLS) to the key provisioning server. This, ofcourse, begs the chicken-and-egg question: how was the private key for that connectionprovisioned? An initial private key may be installed at manufacturing time, providing an abilityto talk only to a provisioning server under the control of the embedded system customer.Regardless of how keys are provisioned, the embedded systems designer must have a plan andapproach that provides adequate security and scalability to meet product requirements.
Figure 4.33:
Embedded computing infrastructure with centralized key server.Embedded Cryptography 259

--- Page 270 ---
For most modern cryptographic systems, multiple functional keys are required.
Key Point
It is never a good idea or practice to use the same key for different functions (such as data
encryption and digital signatures), since a key compromise (e.g., due to a weakness in a speciﬁcfunction or application of the key) will affect all the functions that use the same key.
Most practical, secure, and well-designed cryptographic systems use distinct keys for different
functions. Some examples of key purpose are as follows:
Trafﬁc Encryption Key (TEK): This key is used only for bulk encryption or decryption of
messages or other trafﬁc.
Key Encryption Key (KEK): This key is used to encrypt or decrypt TEKs; usually, the key
server generates KEKs, and they are loaded into the embedded system once in its lifetime. The
KEKs are loaded securely in a trusted facility, generally at the factory or an initial key loadfacility (KLF). Once KEKs are loaded, they are used by the embedded systems to loadsubsequent TEKs either manually or over the air from the key server. TEKs are loaded black(encrypted with a KEK) and decrypted by the embedded system when needed. KEKs areunique to each embedded device, even if a common TEK is loaded to many embedded systems.Therefore, a compromise of one embedded device and its KEK does not compromise any othersystems. A key server, once notiﬁed that a KEK has been compromised, can provide a newTEK (if shared) to the uncompromised systems.
Transmission Security Key (TSK): A key used to provide transmission security as opposed to
trafﬁc security. For example, the link of a satellite ground station to a satellite may be protected at
layer two with TSK-based authenticated encryption, even though the trafﬁc or payload satellitedata has been previously encrypted by a TEK before arriving at the ground station. This additional
protection can be used as an anti-jam feature in some satellite systems. For ground systems, TSKs
are sometimes used to protect internal source and target addresses of messages, offering trafﬁcﬂow security and availability of the communication link. For example, in typical secure voiceapplications, the payload voice data is protected by TEK encryption, but the calling and calledparty telephone numbers are sent in the clear prior to establishing a secure connection. Thisweakness exists in most modern secure voice applications. An eavesdropper can easily determinewho is calling each other as well as the trafﬁc density. ATSK-encrypted link, when used, is oftenapplied between major nodes of a communication system, such as a T1 line. An eavesdroppermonitoring a transmission-secured T1 line sees continuous TSK cipher data even if payload voicetrafﬁc is low or non-existent.
Storage Key (SK): An SK is used to protect data that is at rest (DAR), stored either locally
within the embedded system or remotely, such as a network attached storage (NAS) or260 Chapter 4

--- Page 271 ---
enterprise storage area network (SAN). SKs can be generated internally by the embedded
system or by the key server and sent in the black to the embedded device.
(3) Key Distribution Typical systems require both symmetric and asymmetric (public) keys for
distribution. Once an embedded system is registered, additional keys are provided to it. All the
keys sent from the key server to an embedded device are encrypted in a point-to-point mode,usually using the KEK of each embedded device.
(4) Key Change
Key Point
Robust and well-designed systems should change keys as often as practical to minimize the
window of vulnerability of a compromised key.
The shorter the period of key use, the shorter the volume of compromised data. This period of
use is called the cryptoperiod. For embedded systems that have been compromised and keyspresumably obtained by an adversary, a key change is essential to the rest of the embeddeddevices that were potentially using the same TEK as the compromised system. The key changeshould be started as soon as the compromise is detected, even if it disrupts trafﬁc for theduration of the key change. This type of key change is called a supersession key change .
Unfortunately, many autonomous embedded systems deployed in the ﬁeld today do not effectivelymanage key changes, and these systems are often at risk of an undetectable compromise. In fact,many embedded systems are deployed with no ability for periodic or supersession key change.This can allow resources to be compromised without detection for months or years. Clearly, it isbest to periodically change keys, even if it requires a manual new key load. We all suffer from thisproblem of changing keys; for example, we hate to change the passwords we use for onlinebanking, social networking, and our PCs. But from a security point of view, not to mention peace ofmind, frequent cycling of private security parameters is highly recommended.
(5) Key Destruction All keys whose cryptoperiod have expired or have been compromised
should be destroyed within the embedded system and key server, and a record maintained,
to avoid reuse of the compromised key.
(6) Key Protection
Key Point
The protection of keys, both from a physical as well as logical/software perspective, is one of the
most important security features within an embedded system that employs cryptography, yet it isall too often ignored or poorly addressed.Embedded Cryptography 261

--- Page 272 ---
If a system does not have adequate protection, an adversary can obtain the key and totally
compromise any assets protected by that key. Unfortunately, there are many ways, some ofwhich are very sophisticated, that an adversary can obtain the keys stored in an embeddedsystem. While full-proof (or as near as possible) protection may be too costly for an embeddedsystem, this does not mean that the issue should be ignored. At a minimum, the system designermust formulate a protection plan based on the threat environment and value of resources underprotection.
Threat environment is often inﬂuenced by the physical location of the embedded system
and whether there is some other form of physical protection beyond the embedded deviceitself. Unattended devices that are not located in a physically protected environment (suchas a reasonably guarded building) are the most vulnerable for a passive and potentiallyactive attack, including theft of the embedded system itself. Direct physical access of thesystem may result in detection or extraction of its keys. When a U.S. EP-3 militaryreconnaissance plane crash-landed in China, all the electronics, including cryptographiccommunications and storage devices, were at the disposal of the Chinese military; imaginethe gold mine of information that was extracted. This event is known as the Hainan Island
Incident .
There are many affordable techniques and design practices that can be embedded intoembedded systems for key protection. Some are described next.
Non-volatile key storage: Avoid storing plaintext keys (and passwords) in non-volatile
memory. This includes private encryption keys as well as the public keys used for public key
cryptographic authentication. While the public portion of an asymmetric key pair need not bekept secret to maintain cryptographic strength, these keys are often used to prove authenticityof software, ﬁrmware, or other critical data. If an attacker is able to replace a plaintext publickey with the attacker’s key, then the authentication functions will incorrectly validatemalicious ﬁrmware. Keys stored in permanent memory should always be encrypted. Whenthe cryptographic subsystem is not operational (e.g., placed in a sleep state to reduce power),any internally managed keys must be encrypted before being stored into non-volatilememory.
In most embedded systems performing a security function, however, some plaintext keys must
be physically present.
Key Point
Private keys stored in an embedded system’s primary non-volatile memory (e.g., ﬂash memory or
hard disk) should be encrypted and decrypted with a plaintext KEK that is ideally held in non-
volatile storage external to the main applications processor and protected against physical
attacks.262 Chapter 4

--- Page 273 ---
These cryptographic storage systems are sometimes called secure elements . Protected storage
is often coupled with cryptographic accelerators. These come in many forms, including
 Cryptographic engine within the same SoC as the applications processor
Separate
discrete microcontroller
 Trusted Platform Module (TPM) Hardware Security Module (HSM)
Without a secure element built into the embedded system, keys must be kept in ﬂash or on disk,making them
more susceptible to external attacks and software attacks resulting from
weaknesses in operating systems controlling the platform.
In addition to common software-based side channel attacks using cache behavior analysis,
attacks on keys include physical tampering and simple and differential power analysis (SPA,DPA). These attacks have proven quite practical in the wild. For example, in September 2011,cryptography researchers disclosed they were able to recover the private key froma commercial, ﬁelded smart card microcontroller, the NXP DESFire MFICD40, in hours usinga power analysis attack that required a few thousand dollars’ worth of equipment toperpetrate.
27
The goal of secure key storage is to prevent such attacks. The ability of hardware-based keystorage approaches to prevent such attacks varies. For commercial secure elements, the FIPS140-2 certiﬁcation level is an important measurement of this robustness. FIPS 140-2certiﬁcation is discussed later in this chapter.
Attended State: For embedded subsystems that are attended, a good practice is to provide
a user authentication mechanism, either through a password or a physical token, to enable use
of the cryptographic subsystem. When the system is not in an active, authenticated, attendedstate, the cryptographic subsystem enters a protected mode in which all keys within areencrypted. Inserting the token or reentering the password unlocks the cryptographic subsystem,permitting non-volatile memory decryption of keys for operational use.
Unattended State: For autonomous embedded systems, robust key protection is desired since
we must assume that an adversary will have unlimited time to mount either a passive or active
attack to recover the keys. Protection should include key zeroization upon detection of physicalprobing (hardware or software) and zeroization upon detection of power loss to a certain level.There are many other attacks that an adversary may attempt, and upfront decisions must bemade to either include or exclude countermeasures in the design. For example, an adversarymay include in her repertoire an active attack that forces failure of the cryptographic subsystemmicroprocessor. To counter this threat, consideration must be given for the cryptographicsubsystem design to be fail-safe. In other words, to prevent the leakage of keys to externalinterfaces when a hardware failure occurs, the device must contain alarm circuitry that inhibits
all operation and zeroizes all volatile keys upon detection of a cryptographic subsystem failure.Embedded Cryptography 263

--- Page 274 ---
An advanced approach to fail-safety is to use redundant circuits that can detect functional
mismatches, providing early warning against systematic failure.
(7) Key Revocation Revocation is often a common life-cycle event when a public key
certiﬁcate’s lifetime ends.
Key Point
For embedded systems that are lost, stolen, or are known to have their cryptographic subsystems
compromised, provision must be made to revoke all the keys associated with the compromised orlost unit.
Other devices within the compromised system’s worldview (e.g., communication peers on
a network) must be told that the keys in question have been revoked. Each embedded system inturn should zeroize all the affected keys.
Keys corresponding to embedded systems with short ﬁeld lifetimes may not support revocation
at all. When the lifetime is complete, the entire embedded system is disposed, including itsprivate keys.
In other cases, revocation will be impractical due to a lack of communication capability to
a revocation server that provides up-to-date revocation lists. In this case, the only recourse fora revoked key may be to re-install potential peers with a static list of revoked keys.
4.14.3 Key Management Case Studies
4.14.3.1 Case Study: Secure Wireless Push-to-Talk Radio Network
This case describes a secure wireless handheld voice radio network and the various options of
managing its keys. As shown in Figure 4.34 , each radio is equipped with an embedded
cryptographic subsystem to secure voice trafﬁc. This network is characterized by low-powerwireless communications across a relatively small number of endpoints (radios), i.e., tens orhundreds, not tens of thousands. The wireless network may be deployed as part of a secretmilitary mission to hunt down terrorists, a crime sting, or a private operation of some kind thatrequires a secure wireless network.
For the military application, at least some of the cryptographic algorithms used within the
cryptographic subsystem are likely classiﬁed. For the other applications, the cryptographicsubsystem most likely uses AES conﬁgured as a keystream cipher in OFB mode.Depending on the radio frequency (RF) channel bandwidth (e.g., narrowband orwideband), the voice compression algorithm is either a government standard such as MixedExcitation Linear Prediction (MELP) or a commercial standard like G.729.
28For264 Chapter 4

--- Page 275 ---
narrowband channels, we would not use pulse code modulation (PCM) for analog-
to-digital conversion and voice compression. A generalized architectural diagram of theradio is shown in Figure 4.35.
Secure network operation is initiated by a user pressing the radio’s push-to-talk (PTT) button.A PTT initiation interrupts the network and alerts all network subscribers that voicecommunication is about to take place. For example, upon a PTT initiation, the radio sendsa plaintext pattern of alternating ones and zeros on the line, alerting all other receivers thata cryptographic synchronization is about to be initiated. For burst or noisy channels, the cryptosynchronization message sent by the PTT initiator uses a proper error-encoding scheme toassure perfect reception of the IV by all the receivers. Release of the PTT button results in anencrypted end-of-message (EOM), alerting all receivers that all trafﬁc should be dropped untila new cryptographic synchronization is transmitted. Once a channel is released, any other usercan initiate voice communication using her PTT.
There are many options available for key management of the PTT network and its radios; they
are described next.
Figure 4.34:
Secure wireless push-to-talk radio network.Embedded Cryptography 265

--- Page 276 ---
4.14.3.1.1 Option One: Load a Common Red TEK into Each Radio at a Key Load Facility
Users must not be allowed to load their own red TEKs. This policy avoids the insider threat of
an end user divulging the red TEK in her possession. It is best to load the red TEK in a trustedkey load facility (KLF), as shown in Figure 4.36 .
As shown in this diagram, a common method to provision a set of radios is to connect each oftheir key load ports to an installation network that also includes a key server. The key servermay be a simple PC. The installation network may be a local Ethernet network that is used forthe key provisioning process. It is good policy for the radio to have a distinct physical port that
is used speciﬁcally for key provisioning. This reduces the possibility that an improper
connection is established with the radio’s internal key loading software. Once this red TEK isloaded over the installation wire, it is used as the common TEK of the deployed tacticalnetwork and not changed during the mission. At the end of the mission, when the radios arereturned, a new red TEK is loaded at the KLF for the next mission.
This option is viable and simple to implement. However, if one of the radios is lost,
compromised, or captured in a hostile environment, communications security is lost. The only
Figure 4.35:
Generalized secure military radio diagram.
Figure 4.36:
Key load facility.266 Chapter 4

--- Page 277 ---
way to re-establish secure communications would be to abort the mission, returning the radios
to the KLF for reloading.
4.14.3.1.2 Option Two: Load a Black Key in the Field
Instead of a TEK, a unique per-radio, red KEK is loaded into each radio at the KLF. In addition, thecommon network TEK is encrypted with each unique KEK and loaded into a portable keyingdevice (see Figure 4.37 ), issued to each user to take into the ﬁeld along with the radio. The user
then loads the black TEK into the radio using the keying device. Finally, the radio decrypts theTEK using its unique KEK, and the radio is now available for network communications.
This option allows the user to manually reload a new TEK into her radio. Each keying device
can be provisioned at the KLF with a large set of black TEKs, enabling dynamic rekeying in theﬁeld for extended periods of time.
The common network TEK is encrypted in the unique KEK using an electronic codebook
scheme called a key wrap, described earlier in this chapter. All the KEKs are generated andloaded at the KLF and never exposed or used in the ﬁeld.
Another method of provisioning the keying device is to load a copy of the per-radio KEKs
instead of the black TEKs. Then the owner of the keying device (the ﬁeld key provisioningofﬁcer) uses a trusted interface, such as a button, to dynamically generate and encrypt a TEKthat can be installed into all the radios. The keying device should require strong multi-factorauthentication, such as password and smart card insertion, from the provisioning ofﬁcer toenable the load function. This approach enables a set of ﬁelded radios to be rekeyed an inﬁnitenumber of times, as long as the keying device remains protected. Because it contains red keysfor all the radios, the keying device becomes a single point of failure in which compromise ofthe internal keys will expose all communications. Tamper protection of the keying device isindicated when it contains red keys.
4.14.3.1.3 Option Three: Key Load Using Public Key Cryptography
Option three is similar to option one, except that instead of loading a red TEK into the radio atthe KLF, the TEKs are loaded over the KLF’s installation network by ﬁrst establishinga session key through a key exchange between a master key server and each of the radios, in
Figure 4.37:
Black TEK load into radio.Embedded Cryptography 267

--- Page 278 ---
turn. This session key is used to send the TEKs to each radio, as shown in Figure 4.38 .F o r
option three, no red keys are ever exposed, even at the KLF. This protects against some insider
threats within the KLF’s installation network. The use of public key exchange assumes that allradios are pre-provisioned, at the manufacturer, with private static public keys and a rootcertiﬁcate for the installation network prior to transfer to the KLF.
To simplify the installation process, the key server and radios connected on the KLF’s
provisioning network can derive the network TEKs from shared secret data established duringeach server-radio key exchange. In fact, multiple TEKs, to last multiple missions, can becreated and installed using this process.
Of course, a public key exchange can be applied to option two, e.g., to provision the keying
devices and radios with KEKs. Then the keying devices can be used to install TEKsperiodically, as needed, to the radios in the ﬁeld.
4.14.3.1.4 Option Four: Over-the-Air Rekey Capability
In this fourth scenario, option two or three is ﬁrst used to load a KEK and an initial TEK intoeach of the radios at the KLF. Then, as needed in the ﬁeld, the master key server remotely sendsto each radio a new common TEK, as shown in Figure 4.39 .
The key server interfaces to the radios to establish a session and remotely send the new TEK. Ofcourse, this approach works only if the radios are within communications range of the key server.The key server ﬁrst establishes the connection using the initial TEK and the PTT forsynchronization. Once a session is established, the key server utilizes the following rekey protocol:
1. The key server sends an encrypted rekey alert message, notifying all radios that a rekey is
about to
take place.
2. Each radio leaves the trafﬁc state and waits for a key load from the server.
Figure 4.38:
Black key load to radio using public key cryptography.268 Chapter 4

--- Page 279 ---
3. The key server establishes cryptographic synchronization via a public key exchange with
each radio and then sends the new common TEK.
4. This rekey sequence is followed for all radios until all of them receive the new TEK.
This rekey process is used for a periodic or a supersession rekey, the difference being that
forsupersession,
the key server would only rekey the uncompromised radios. The key
server destroys the KEK of the compromised unit. Secure communications continue oncethe compromised radio is logically eliminated from the network through this rekeyprocess. Even if an a ttacker succeeded in recovering the TEK and KEK of the
compromised radio, she can never join the network, since all radios were rekeyed withan e wT E K .
If OTAR communication is possible in the deployed tactical network, this approach is
streamlined yet robust. However, because it is imbued with a capability to send criticalkeying material over a wireless network, the key server must be completely trustworthy. Inaddition to running trustworthy software, the key server must be physically protected. Whennot in use, or left unattended, the key server must be unavailable for overt or covert keyextraction.
One way to protect access to an unattended key server is to lock it using a token, such as a smart
card. This token contains one-half of a storage key that is used to encrypt all KEKs in the keyserver’s non-volatile memory. The other half of the split storage key is contained in the keyserver’s cryptographic subsystem. In the locked mode, all keys are encrypted, and even if thekey server computer is stolen, an adversary will not be able to recover any keys. Only when thekey server is unlocked are the splits reconnected to recover the storage key and make theencrypted radio keys available for loading.
Figure 4.39:
Over-the-air rekey (OTAR) of new TEK.Embedded Cryptography 269

--- Page 280 ---
4.14.3.2 Case Study: Generalized Phone Communications
This case study describes how to secure sensitive voice and data communications for all types
of human-operated equipment, such as mobile handsets. The solution discussed is scalable andcan provide end-to-end security for extremely large networks, on the scale of the Internet. Weexplore several generalized key management options available to system designers andcontrast each option in terms of security robustness.
A voice/data system is made up of switches connected to each other by trunk lines. The end
instruments can take on a variety of form factors and interfaces including wired dplain old
telephone service (POTS) or digitald and wireless phones. The cryptography resides within or
near the end instruments, providing what is generally termed end-to-end encryption andavoiding link-to-link encryption (see Figure 4.40 ). End-to-end encryption avoids “red ebridge”
compromises that could potentially occur at the junctures between the encrypted segments ina multi-link network.
For our generalized case, we are not precluding use of any physical network media. The
switching network can be analog (e.g., POTS), digital (e.g., ISDN), the Internet (e.g., Voice-over-IP), wireless RF, or any combination thereof. The embedded cryptography residing at ornear the end instruments is applied only at the applications layer of the OSI model. Voice/datais encrypted at the end instruments and traverses a non-trusted, potentially hostilecommunication network, whose availability cannot be guaranteed. We describe, however,mitigation approaches that improve availability of the network by the use of transmissionsecurity techniques. We also describe techniques that protect both voice/data trafﬁc as well assignaling (indication of the calling and called telephone numbers), sometimes referred to assecure dial.
As shown in the system diagram in Figure 4.41 , end instruments are connected to local
switches. Calls initiated by an end user are routed either locally or through trunks to remote
Figure 4.40:
End-to-end and link-to-link encryption comparison.270 Chapter 4

--- Page 281 ---
switches and connected point-to-point to the called party. For this case study , we cover all
types of communications devices, from secure phones developed from scratch to unmodiﬁed,
commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) wired or wireless phones with cryptography as anapplique.
4.14.3.2.1 Cryptographic Subsystem Embedment Options
There are many options available for cryptographic subsystem embedment; they are describednext.
4.14.3.2.1.1 Option One: Cryptographic Subsystem Embedded within the End Instrument Option
one is shown in Figure 4.42 .
Figure 4.41:
Phone network system diagram.
Figure 4.42:
Cryptography Embedded within Instrument.Embedded Cryptography 271

--- Page 282 ---
4.14.3.2.1.2 Option Two: Bump-on-the-Line (Attached to End Instrument) Option two uses an
unmodiﬁed phone, and the cryptographic element is an applique connected to the output of
the phone, as shown in Figure 4.43 .
4.14.3.2.1.3 Option Three: Bump-on-the-Handset Similar to option two, in option three, the
cryptographic unit (encryptor) is connected between the handset and the base of theinstrument (see Figure 4.44 ).
With all these embedment options, we can safely say that phone voice/data security can bedeployed without replacement of all legacy telephones and instruments.
A generalized block diagram of the cryptographic unit is shown in Figure 4.45 .
Voice compression, depending on the trafﬁc classiﬁcation, can be a standard low-rate vocoder
(codec) speciﬁed in G.729, a government-speciﬁed vocoder like MELP, or any other vocoder.The cryptographic unit can store several (or many) vocoders, and after cryptographicsynchronization through an established protocol, determine a common vocoder contained in
Figure 4.43:
Bump-on-the-line (attached to instrument).
Figure 4.44:
Bump-on-the-handset.272 Chapter 4

--- Page 283 ---
both end instruments. Note that encoding and decoding have historically been incorporated
into the cryptographic unit even though these functions are not involved in cryptography. Thisis done primarily for performance; in addition, in some cases, there may be a desire to keep thecodecs themselves secret.
For our generalized secure voice/data system, a typical call is established as follows:
1. The calling party goes off-hook, obtains a dial tone from the switch, and enters the called
party’ s
telephone number.
2. The switch receives the called party telephone number and either “rings” the called party if
local or routes the number to a remote switch that then “rings” the called party.
3. When the called party answers, the switch infrastructure establishes an end-to-end
connection between the calling and called parties.
4. End-to-end secure voice/data trafﬁc is established by the end instruments.
4.14.3.2.2 Key Management Options
Once the end-to-end call is established, encrypted voice/data is exchanged, provided the end
instruments possess a shared secret session key. Of course, there are options for establishingthis session key.
Figure 4.45:
Embedded cryptographic unit (full-duplex key generator) block diagram.Embedded Cryptography 273

--- Page 284 ---
4.14.3.2.2.1 Option One: Pre-Load a Common TEK to All Instruments The ﬁrst option is
a common, low-cost, and simple option. But by now, it should be obvious that this option
is not robust. The risk of a key compromise for a widely shared key is relatively high. Oncethe key is compromised, the entire communications system is compromised. As explained inthe previous case study, the pre-shared key option could potentially be used for a small
number of subscribers on a mission for a limited cryptoperiod; otherwise, it is notrecommended.
4.14.3.2.2.2 Option Two: Use Public Key Exchange to Derive a Session Key In option two, after
the end-to-end connection is established, the instruments perform a public key exchange (e.g.,
using Difﬁe-Hellman) to create a secret session key for subsequent encryption and decryptionof trafﬁc. The session key is common only between the two end instruments and is destroyed atthe end of the session. The cryptoperiod of the session key is as short as the phone call. A newsession key is established on subsequent calls. Thus, the system is not vulnerable to exhaustivekey space attacks, since the key is changed at every session. Assuming the endpoints areutilizing standards-recommended key lengths and algorithms, an active eavesdropper could notbreak a session key even with vast computational power at her disposal.
A public key is initially loaded into the end instruments by a trusted key server or certiﬁcation
authority (CA). The public key is encapsulated in a certiﬁcate, signed by the CA. Onlycertiﬁed public keys are honored by the calling and called parties. If an end instrument iscompromised, the CA revokes the instrument’s public key certiﬁcate and places it ina revocation list that is sent to the end instruments. During call setup, the end instruments donot honor any certiﬁcate on the revocation list. The CA may distribute revocation lists to endinstruments periodically. Alternatively, the CA can push revocation lists to a set of nearbyinstruments, and those instruments can disseminate the lists to other terminals ina distribution chain.
While key management options one and two provide end-to-end security, the key exchange
method is a better solution and is scalable to a large number of subscribers. Both solutions arepoint-to-point solutions. Point-to-multipoint solutions would require a common TEK for themultipoint network. Neither option one nor option two is able to do this, since session keys areassigned to only two parties. A common TEK requires a key server, similar to the earlier push-to-talk case study, for distribution of a common TEK using pre-established per-instrumentKEKs.
These two key management options provide protection only of the voice/data information; they
do not protect addressing information. Calling and called party numbers are dialed in the clear.An eavesdropper monitoring the communication links is unable to decrypt trafﬁc but is able todetermine the volume of trafﬁc as well as who is calling each other. For systems that requireaddressing conﬁdentiality, a modiﬁed approach is needed.274 Chapter 4

--- Page 285 ---
4.14.3.2.3 Addressing Protection
4.14.3.2.3.1 Option One: Bulk Encryption between Trunk End Points Trunks carrying many
subscriber telephone numbers between central switches can be protected by link-to-link
encryption of the trunk lines, as shown in Figure 4.46 .
This solution protects the addresses of instruments within the trunk segments but does notprotect the addresses of local switch subscribers. Nevertheless, this approach is viable andprovides signiﬁcant system-wide transmission security. An active eavesdropper, monitoring
the trunk lines, observes a continuous random stream (the cipher of the link), whether or not
any signaling or activity is taking place between the trunks. Jamming the trunks is very hard,since it would require a very powerful wideband noise jammer.
4.14.3.2.3.2 Option Two: Local Protection of Addresses To eliminate the vulnerability of option
one, per-subscriber addressing protection is required. This is a hard problem. One solution that
is costly and complex is to provide a key distribution center (KDC) for each switching center.The KDC would provide a local key generator that connects to subscribers during dial or ringtone, securing the link during these phases.
The KDC, as shown in Figure 4.47 , consists of a key controller, where all the symmetric keys
are generated and stored, and a set of loop key generators (LKGs), to which the switch can
connect during the dial/ring phase.
Each subscriber is pre-loaded with a unique KEK generated at the KDC. Secure call
establishment would follow the protocol shown in Figure 4.48 .
When the switch detects off-hook from the calling party, and before the terminal receives a dialtone, the switch connects an LKG to the calling party after the LKG receives the unique KEKof the subscriber. Note that the LKG is physically protected within the KDC, along with theprimary key generator and key storage. The KDC also generates a per-session TEK and sends itto the LKGs of the caller and callee. The LKG and calling party establish a cryptographicsynchronization using the unique KEK, and the LKG sends the TEK, encrypted by the KEK, tothe calling party.
Figure 4.46:
Trunk protection using encryption.Embedded Cryptography 275

--- Page 286 ---
Figure 4.47:
KDC for secure dial.
Figure 4.48:
Secure call establishment.276 Chapter 4

--- Page 287 ---
Once it receives the TEK, the calling party initiates a new cryptographic synchronization with
the LKG using the TEK. The switch then sends the dial tone through the LKG. The caller inturns sends the called party’s number securely. Once the switch obtains the dial digits, the LKGis dropped from the connection and made available for other calls.
The switch rings the called party, and when the called subscriber goes off-hook, the LKG
assigned to the called party is ﬁrst given the same TEK (session key) that was originallygenerated by the KDC for the calling party. Once the TEK is sent to the called party securelyvia the LKG, the LKG is dropped and an end-to-end connection is established between thecalling and called parties. The calling party initiates trafﬁc, secured with the TEK, by sendingthe cryptographic synchronization sequence.
A new random session key is generated for each call. After each call, the session key is
destroyed at the KDC and in the end instruments. Exhaustive key attacks are infeasible.
This solution is secure but expensive and not well scalable for millions of subscribers, since
each KDC would have to store the KEKs of all its subscribers. The interface between the KDCand the switch has a red component, namely plaintext to and from LKGs. Thus, each KDC hasto be collocated with the switch in a secure facility.
Cryptographic systems today, in general, do not protect signaling information (addresses,
telephone numbers, signaling protocols). The Internet does not protect addressing information.Consequently, active, intelligent eavesdroppers can create havoc with this vulnerability.
4.15 Cryptographic Certiﬁcations
Due to its importance in practically every facet of security technology, cryptographicimplementation is one of the most heavily regulated components in the computing world.While this section does not attempt to cover all cryptographic-related certiﬁcations (forexample, the ﬁnancial and payments industries perform some types of device-speciﬁcapprovals), we brieﬂy discuss the ubiquitous FIPS 140 certiﬁcation as well as NSA’s U.S.government cryptographic certiﬁcation and approval processes. We discuss when developersmay be affected by these certiﬁcations, provide a general overview, and point readers to othersources of useful information and guidance.
4.15.1 FIPS 140-2 Certiﬁcation
4.15.1.1 FIPS 140-2 Standard
FIPS publication 140-2 speciﬁes security requirements (see summary in Table 4.6 ) for
cryptographic hardware and software implementations.29FIPS 140-2 certiﬁcation acts as
a benchmark for base-level commercial quality and is mandated by certain organizations, such
as the U.S. government for all its sensitive but unclassiﬁed communications (certiﬁcation ofEmbedded Cryptography 277

--- Page 288 ---
classiﬁed communications systems is handled by the NSA). Because many embedded systems
target government end customers, the use of FIPS 140-certiﬁed software and/or hardware isoften a critical requirement for embedded systems designers. In addition, many commercialareas, such as the ﬁnancial community, have adopted FIPS 140-2 as a requirement.
In some cases, using a, FIPS 140-certiﬁed software library or add-in network card within
a design may not be sufﬁcient. Government policy states that any product that implementscryptography must be FIPS 140 certiﬁed. Thus, equipment such as a network securityappliance must itself be FIPS 140 certiﬁed.
It is important to note that FIPS 140 primarily speciﬁes functional requirements and very little
in the way of assurance requirements; correspondingly, validation is geared toward black boxfunctional testing. More rigorous assurance requirements, such as source-code-levelpenetration testing, are required neither by the standard nor NIST’s validation program.A salient example of the relative lack of assurance rigor is found in the following functionalrequirement ( section 4.6.1 of the FIPS 140-2 standard):
For Security Level 1 only, the cryptographic module shall prevent access by other processes
to plaintext private and secret keys, CSPs, and intermediate key generation values during
the time the cryptographic module is executing/operational.30
This requirement would seem to imply that a cryptographic software implementation would
necessarily be instantiated as a separate process, independent and memory protected from anyTable 4.6: FIPS 140 Requirements overview.
Requirement Category Description
Cryptographic Module Speciﬁcation Documentation explains cryptographic boundary,
algorithms used, key establishment methods, hardware/
software/ﬁrmware architecture
Cryptographic Module Interfaces Documentation explains all cryptographic interfaces and
data paths
Roles, Authentication, and Services Documentation of cryptographic system roles (software
and users); role, identity, and multi-factor authentication
requirements based on security level
Software/Firmware Security Integrity protection requirements based on security level
Operational Environment Protection and access control of cryptographic boundary
within system
Physical Security Invasive and non-invasive tamper evidence, detection, and
resistance, depending on security level
Security Parameter Management Random number and key generation, zeroization,
handling, storage, I/O
Self-Tests Pre-operational and runtime integrity protection and
algorithmic validation tests
Life-Cycle Assurance Conﬁguration management, speciﬁcation, design, and
testing rigor depending on security level278 Chapter 4

--- Page 289 ---
other processes in the system, using a message-based API to invoke cryptographic services. Yet
practically all FIPS 140-2 validated software modules are implemented as dynamic linklibraries (DLLs) that, by deﬁnition, share the same memory space as the applications that usethem.
FIPS 140-2 speciﬁes four qualitative levels, one through four, with relatively increasing
functional requirements. Level 1 covers non-physical requirements, such as validation thatalgorithm implementations meet their speciﬁcations. Level 2 adds tamper detectionrequirements. Level 3 requires tamper resistance. Level 4 extends the tamper protectionrequirements but also adds protection against environmental anomalies such as voltage ortemperature ﬂuctuations. FIPS 140-2 does not, however, explicitly require protection againstcertain sophisticated attacks, such as those based on DPA, timing, and TEMPEST.
4.15.1.2 FIPS 140-3
FIPS 140-3 is expected to eventually supersede FIPS 140-2. Ratiﬁcation of the new standard is
anticipated no earlier than 2012. A short grace period will follow wherein FIPS 140-2 will stillbe accepted by the U.S. government. Embedded systems designers planning to ﬁeldcryptographic products should be aware of FIPS 140-3 and plan to comply with the newstandard. A good place to start is the current draft of the standard that can be found on NIST’spublic draft’s website.
31
FIPS 140-3 compliance will have limited impact on embedded systems designers targetingFIPS 140 Levels 1 and 2. One of the main drivers of FIPS 140-3 is to add explicitrequirements for some of the aforementioned sophisticated attacks, which kick in atLevels 3 and 4. Speciﬁc types of attacks (including DPA) are called out in what is
currently labeled Annex F of the draft standard.
32However, the standard remains non-
prescriptive with respect to how to defeat these attacks. The validation program will most
likely rely on approved testing laboratories, such as SAIC, to apply well-known attackvectors and validate the operation of well-known countermeasures. For embedded systemsdevelopers who wish to learn more about FIPS 140 certiﬁcation (either 140-2 or 140-3),good sources of information as well as hands-on training are provided by companies suchas SAIC, which has an FIPS consultancy business independent (ﬁrewalled) from itsgovernment-testing laboratory.
Developers of security appliances that may beneﬁt from the marketing value of an FIPS 140
certiﬁcation are advised to take a training class, provided by SAIC and other FIPS certiﬁcationexperts, that will introduce designers to the general process of FIPS certiﬁcation. In general,the documentary and testing requirements for a FIPS certiﬁcation, assuming that the productalready meets what are a reasonable and unsurprising set of functional requirements at any ofthe FIPS security levels, are not extreme. In fact, an FIPS consultancy company can providetemplates for policy and user guides that will get you most of the way there.Embedded Cryptography 279

--- Page 290 ---
Perhaps the most painful part of the FIPS certiﬁcation process is the length of time dnine
months to a year or sometimes longerd it takes to obtain the certiﬁcation once the product has
been submitted for evaluation. However, some government organizations may accept a product
that is under evaluation. When an organization is working with an experienced FIPSconsultancy, the probability of a product not passing an evaluation when the consultancy hasbeen deemed the product ready for submission is close to zero.
4.15.2 NSA Certiﬁcation
4.15.2.1 Cryptographic Product Classiﬁcation
Information can be protected in a variety of ways, including physical protection by armed
guards and structures such as buildings, vaults, or safety deposit boxes. Information, at rest orin transit, protected by cryptographic means is usually implemented by electronic hardwareand/or software, in accordance with speciﬁcations developed by two U.S. agencies. TheNational Security Agency (NSA) speciﬁes the design, documentation, assurance, andcertiﬁcation requirements for U.S.-classiﬁed or sensitive-but-unclassiﬁed information. TheNational Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) speciﬁes the requirements for private orcommercial information.
U.S. government information is protected through the development of cryptographic elements
or devices deﬁned as
Type 1: Cryptographic
 element or product that protects Top Secret (TS) or Secret (S)
information.
Type 2: Cryptographic element or product that protects sensitive-but-unclassiﬁed (SBU)
information
Type 1 and Type 2 cryptographic devices use Type 1 or Type 2 cryptographic algorithmsthat ha 
ve historically been speciﬁed by the NSA and are often classiﬁed. However, as we
discuss further later in this chapter, this line has become quite blurred since the NSAlaunched its recent program to allow for some Type 1 classiﬁed devices to use layered NISTalgorithms.
Unclassiﬁed information is governed by NIST under two additional categories:
Type 3: Cryptographic
 element that uses NIST speciﬁed algorithms, including symmetric
and hash algorithms. AES, DES, triple DES, Skipjack, and SHA are examples of NIST-
speciﬁed algorithms.
Type 4: Cryptographic algorithms that are registered with but not speciﬁed by NIST. Type
4 used to refer to exportable algorithms; however, this is no longer the case, and henceType 4 has little applicability in modern embedded systems.280 Chapter 4

--- Page 291 ---
Cryptographic elements or products that want to obtain the NIST “seal of approval” must use
Type 3 algorithms and undergo an FIPS 140 certiﬁcation process. While commercialcryptographic elements do not necessarily require FIPS 140 certiﬁcation, cryptographicelements for sale to U.S. government agencies require FIPS-140 certiﬁcation.
Type 1 and Type 2 cryptographic devices are speciﬁed, tested, and certiﬁed by the NSA. The
functional and security requirements for Type 1 and Type 2 devices are described in a set ofclassiﬁed and unclassiﬁed documents. An important governing document for the design,testing, and veriﬁcation of Type 1 products is the Uniﬁed INFOSEC Criteria (UIC), a classiﬁedSecret document. Other documents describing cryptographic and associated protocols areclassiﬁed For Ofﬁcial Use Only (FOUO).
The Type 1 speciﬁcations cover two categories:
Top Secret (TS): Process
 that must be followed for securing TS information is covered in
the sections for High Grade/High assurance of the UIC.
Secret (S): Process that must be followed for securing S information is covered in the
sections of High Grade/Medium Assurance of the UIC.
An embedded systems developer who designs Type 1 devices can choose to develop a single
Type
1 device that covers both TS and S, or two separate devices, one for TS and one for S.
A device designed to TS standards can secure TS, S, or unclassiﬁed information. A devicedesigned to S standards can secure Secret or unclassiﬁed information (Secret-and-below orSABI). Type 3 and Type 4 devices (FIPS 140 certiﬁed or NIST registered) have historically notbeen allowed to secure U.S. DoD classiﬁed information (TS, S).
While Type 1 devices generally contain cryptographic algorithms that are classiﬁed, NSA
approves the use of Type 3 algorithms (AES for example) for Type 1 applications. Oneexample is allied interoperability where the NSA speciﬁed use of the AES suite of algorithmsfor use in Type 1 devices for use with U.S. allies. It is important to note, however, that whileNSA allows the use of an unclassiﬁed algorithm suite (AES) for classiﬁed information, thedevice must still meet the NSA-speciﬁed Type 1 requirements stated in the UIC.
In fact, Type 1 devices can contain multiple algorithm suites dfor example, one set of
classiﬁed algorithms for U.S. only use and another set of unclassiﬁed algorithms for allied use.
4.15.2.2 Cryptographic Requirements for Type 1 Devices
The NSA speciﬁes the Type 1 design and assurance requirements of a cryptographic device,
using the generalized model shown in Figure 4.49 . NIST follows a similar process for FIPS 140
certiﬁcation.
In NSA terminology, the cryptographic element is often referred to as the End Crypto Unit
(ECU), not to be confused with the automotive industry’s Electronic Control Unit or EngineEmbedded Cryptography 281

--- Page 292 ---
Control Unit. The ECU is the cryptographic element or subsystem that is designed,
documented, and tested in accordance with the UIC. The ECU is the only “trusted” element inthis model. All the security requirements in this model reside in the depicted security boundary.
NSA UIC requires ECU implementations that are standalone, physically separate units or
boxes to meet advanced security requirements such as anti-tamper or anti-TEMPEST(electronic extraction of classiﬁed information). The model does not, however, precludeembedding the ECU into another subsystem or another embedded device, provided the securityboundary is maintained as shown in Figure 4.49 .
When an ECU is embedded into an embedded system, the security-critical interfaces may needto change. For example, if private key plaintext enters the embedded system from an I/Ointerface prior to loading within the ECU, then the portions of the embedded system thatprocess the plaintext and pass it to the ECU must now be included in an expanded securityboundary. Imagine that a Linux kernel manages the I/O interface and pathway to the ECU;suddenly, hundreds of thousands of open source code lines are brought into the securityboundary! This could convert a simple certiﬁcation process into an insurmountable one.
Ignoring this additional surface area could potentially result in a key compromise, since we do
not know what else the untrusted software is doing with the key. Once a key is compromised,the system is compromised. What is even worse, we do not even know when the compromisedoccurred; it could have been on the ﬁrst day of system use.
For any cryptographic application (classiﬁed or unclassiﬁed), the security boundary must be
carefully described and drawn. Security boundary “fuzziness” must be avoided because it willultimately lead to a design of a system that is notsecure.
While the NSA and NIST specify the design of an ECU using the model shown previously, theydo not guarantee that a system using the ECU is secure. For example, suppose we developa secure packet network to handle classiﬁed information. Use of an NSA-certiﬁed ECU toprotect the information ﬂowing across the packet network is necessary but not sufﬁcient to
Figure 4.49:
Cryptographic security boundaries.282 Chapter 4

--- Page 293 ---
guarantee the security of the network itself. Rather, we require a security system certiﬁcation.
Functional and assurance security requirements must be speciﬁed and met at the system levelin accordance with a system security policy. This policy includes key management and otheraspects of system security that fall beyond the scope of the ECU itself.
Unfortunately, systems are usually speciﬁed for general functionality, and the secure elements
are bolted on later. This usually results in vulnerabilities. One obvious example is the Internet.When the Internet was ﬁrst conceived, speciﬁed, and implemented, security requirements werenot formulated. Now that we use the Internet for many security-critical services, includingﬁnancial transactions of all types, security is being bolted on. However, the Internet suffersfrom tremendous vulnerabilities in practically every aspect, from routing and key managementto many of the core Internet communication protocols. It is safe to say that the Internet willnever really be secure regardless of how many security features are retroﬁtted. There are justtoo many untrusted entities, and the security boundary of the Internet is “fuzzy” at best.
4.15.2.3 NSA’s Cryptographic Interoperability StrategyThe sustained and rapid advance of information technology in the twenty-ﬁrst century has
provided motivation for the NSA to develop a new, adaptable cryptographic strategy forprotecting national security information. NSA hopes that through its interoperability strategy,developers will make available strong cryptographic solutions that are easily adopted andshared between warﬁghters, ﬁrst responders, and federal and international partners.
Chapter 5 discusses Suite B and its impact on common network security protocols such as
SSL and IPsec. The promulgation of Suite B is part of a recent NSA initiative to usecommercial-off-the-shelf cryptographic hardware and software for information classiﬁed atSecret-and-below (SAB), including sensitive but unclassiﬁed. In addition, the NSA hascreated new categories of cryptographic certiﬁcations to augment the traditional Type-1certiﬁcation discussed earlier. By varying requirements according to the value of informationand its threat environment, developers and certiﬁers are able to meet security objectives whilecontrolling cost and improving time to market. The certiﬁcation categories for SAB arediscussed next.
4.15.2.3.1 OTS for SECRET
Federal contractors build government-off-the-shelf (GOTS) products speciﬁcally for the U.S.government. GOTS-for-secret certiﬁcation is intended to protect data up to Secret using theSuite B algorithm set. For these systems, the NSA has revised the set of security and testrequirements and has minimized certiﬁcation deliverables, resulting in decreased time tomarket.
Since Suite B algorithms are unclassiﬁed, a GOTS-for-secret device is not considered
a Controlled COMSEC Item (CCI). CCI devices have rigorous handling requirements,Embedded Cryptography 283

--- Page 294 ---
including specialized accounting controls and markings. By avoiding CCI, total cost of
ownership is signiﬁcantly reduced.
4.15.2.3.2 COTS for SECRET
Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) refers to products created for the general market, such as
a FIPS 140-2 certiﬁed VPN concentrator. COTS-for-secret allows, through the NSA-sponsored
Commercial Solutions Partnership Program (CSPP), vendors to propose solutions consisting ofthe composition of multiple COTS products. The COTS-for-secret program is also known asCommercial Solutions for Secret (CSfC). COTS-for-secret stipulates certiﬁcation to FIPS 140-2 and select U.S. government Common Criteria protection proﬁles. The Common Criteriaassurance levels used are minimal since their purpose in this context is to ensureinteroperability.
A major advantage of COTS-for-secret over GOTS-for-secret is that the equipment itself, prior
to the loading of any secret keys, is unclassiﬁed even though it may be used for classiﬁedinformation protection. The use of COTS hardware and software eases the logistical burden fordevelopers and opens up the classiﬁed communications market to more suppliers.
Nevertheless, the certiﬁcation still requires a rigorous design and documentation process.
Usually, the approval process sequence for COTS-for-secret certiﬁcation is as follows:
1. For various applications, such as Wireless LAN, VPN, and disk encryptors, the NSA
publishes a
set of speciﬁcations describing the solution architecture that should be
followed by the vendor.
2. The vendor develops a composed solution from the published architecture and presents the
solution to the NSA for review and approval.
3. The NSA approves the proposed implementation.
It is important to note that NSA approval is quite different from the traditional NSAcertiﬁcation. While 
approval indicates that the developer has followed NSA guidelines, ﬁnal
responsibility for use of the device is left to the Designated Approving Authority (DAA) of theend-user organization, such as a military or intelligence service.
As we discuss in Chapter 5, the NSA has been working with both NIST and IETF to ensure that
industry standards and protocols include the Suite B algorithms. In addition, the NSA hasundertaken many infrastructure initiatives that will incorporate Suite B, including
1. DoD Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) project to move from legacy RSA to Suite
B-preferred elliptic
curve certiﬁcates by 2012
2. Key Management Infrastructure (KMI): an NSA program to provide key management
services for Type 1 and SAB products
3. Suite B-compliant commercial PKI for sensitive but unclassiﬁed agencies284 Chapter 4

--- Page 295 ---
The NSA has also licensed many technologies and makes them freely available to vendors
building Type 1 or Secret-and-below products. For example, the NSA licensed the rights to 26elliptic curve technology patents and made them freely available to industry developingproducts for the U.S. government.
The recent major developments in NSA cryptographic strategy will enhance secure
information sharing to many enterprises including DoD networks, federal and state agencies,and commercial-enterprise networks. In addition, the NSA also hopes that by developing SuiteB with its associated scalability for high-speed data and efﬁcient key sizes critical for wirelesssystems, legacy algorithms such as DES, 3DES, and SHA-1 that perform poorly or exhibitweak security will be discarded.
4.16 Key Points
1. It behooves embedded systems developers to understand NSA cryptographic guidance,
even though NSA certiﬁcation is not required for most embedded systems.
2. NSA Suite B includes a suite of unclassiﬁed cryptographic algorithms providing a variety
of cryptographic services required in modern cryptography, including encryption,hashing, digital signatures, and key exchanges.
3. Because of its proven, unconditional, and simple security, the one-time pad is often
considered the basis of all good encryption systems.
4. The lifetime of a key’s use within a cryptosystem is called the key’s cryptoperiod.5. For the purposes of determining cryptographic strength, proprietary or secret algorithms
are always assumed broken (fully understood and reproducible by an attacker) eitherthrough reverse engineering or other means.
6. Cryptographic modes enable the application of encryption to speciﬁc use cases that have
varying requirements: some modes enable simultaneous origin authentication and dataprotection; some modes have been created simply for improved execution time efﬁ-ciency; some modes propagate bit errors and thus thwart spooﬁng attacks; other modessacriﬁce anti-spooﬁng in exchange for bit error tolerance.
7. A desirable trait of secure communications algorithms and protocols, trafﬁc ﬂow security
(TFS) aims to prevent an eavesdropper from deducing private information from patternsin communication rather than the communicated encrypted data itself.
8. Block ciphers must be designed such that knowledge of large amounts of matched input
and output blocks is insufﬁcient to determine the key other than by exhaustive search ofall possible keys for the applicable key length.
9. AES is the preferred block cipher in NSA Suite B.
10. For key encryption (otherwise known as key wrapping), variable-width ECB is the
preferred encryption mode.Embedded Cryptography 285

--- Page 296 ---
11. Authenticated encryption can be more computationally efﬁcient than executing inde-
pendent encryption and authentication algorithms.
12. Galois Counter Mode (GCM) is the Suite B-recommended authenticated encryption
cipher.
13. Unfortunately, in most realistic uses of public key cryptography, the key distribution
problem is no simpler than the symmetric key-sharing problem due to the need to
distribute and perform a trusted installation of a common authority certiﬁcate.
14. The cryptography community traditionally estimates the cryptographic strength corre-
sponding to key lengths of public key and other algorithms as a measure of bits ofstrength in a symmetric key algorithm, such as AES.
15. NIST special publication 800-57 provides estimates on the length of keys for particular
algorithms based on the length of time the data needs to be protected.
16. Because of its computational inefﬁciency relative to symmetric key, public key cryp-
tography is generally not used for encryption and decryption, particularly for the bulkprocessing of data, such as in a VPN session or full-disk encryption device. Public keycryptography, however, is preferred for digital signatures (providing origin authentica-tion) as well as for the secure distribution of ephemeral symmetric keys.
17. Difﬁe-Hellman is an important algorithm because it enables perfect forward secrecy to be
achieved by network security protocols: session keys cannot be compromised even ifother session keys or one of the long-term private keys used for origin authentication iscompromised.
18. Digital signature functionality must be added to a protocol that employs Difﬁe-Hellman
to use its key agreement for secure peer-to-peer communications.
19. NSA Suite B speciﬁes the use of X.509 v3 certiﬁcates using elliptic curve cryptography
(ECC)-based digital signatures.
20. In some cases, the embedded systems designer may beneﬁt from a cryptographic vendor
who can provide custom, resource-optimized certiﬁcates.
21. While the performance difference between RSA and Elliptic Curve algorithms with their
respective contemporary key sizes is not dramatic, ECC provides better security strengthefﬁciency per bit and therefore is deemed by the NSA and most cryptographers as thesuperior long-term choice.
22. While some implementation options for ECC are covered by patents, all major crypto-
graphic toolkit vendors (as well as the open source OpenSSL developers) have createdECC implementations that follow public speciﬁcations and are believed to be free frompatent risk.
23. For embedded systems that operate on networks using legacy RSA-based PKI, ECC
cannot be practically used until these infrastructures are upgraded to use ECC.
24. Of critical import to embedded systems designers is the requirement that they use an
embedded processor with a true random number generator (TRNG).286 Chapter 4

--- Page 297 ---
25. Pseudo-random number generators (PRNGs), seeded by true random input, are required
for applications that must generate cryptographic random material at a rate higher than
can be created by a system’s local TRNG.
26. A PRNG that is not properly seeded with true random input should never be used for the
creation of private keys.
27. A safe choice of PRNG is an FIPS-approved algorithm, such as those published in NIST
Special Publication 800-90.
28. Ideally, private keys are born within and never leave the embedded system in which they
are used.
29. It is never a good idea or practice to use the same key for different functions (such as data
encryption and digital signatures), since a key compromise (e.g., due to a weakness ina speciﬁc function or application of the key) will affect all the functions that use the samekey.
30. Robust and well-designed systems should change keys as often as practical to minimize
the window of vulnerability of a compromised key.
31. The protection of keys, both from a physical as well as logical/software perspective, is
one of the most important security features within an embedded system that employscryptography, yet it is all too often ignored or poorly addressed.
32. Private keys stored in an embedded system’s primary non-volatile memory (e.g., ﬂash
memory or hard disk) should be encrypted and decrypted with a plaintext KEK that isideally held in non-volatile storage external to the main applications processor andprotected against physical attacks.
33. For embedded systems that are lost, stolen, or are known to have their cryptographic
subsystems compromised, provision must be made to revoke all the keys associated withthe compromised or lost unit.
4.17 Bibliography and Notes
1. Kahn D. The Codebreakers: History of Secret Communication from Ancient Times to the Internet . New York,
NY: Scribner; 1967.
2. Kahn D. Seizing the Enigma: The Race to Break the German U-Boats Codes, 1939e 1943 . Barnes and Noble;
1991.
3. Deavours CA, et al. Cryptology: Machines, History, and Methods. Artech House, Inc.; 1989.
4. Fact Sheet No. 1 for the National Policy on the Use of the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) to Protect
National Security Systems and National Security Information (CNSSP-15) (June 2003).
5. NSA Suite B Cryptography. www.nsa.gov/ia/programs/suiteb_cryptography
6. Gilbert VS. Secret Signaling System. U.S. Patent 1310719, issued July 22, 1919.
7. Claude S. Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems. Bell System Technical Journal 28(4): 656e715. 1949.
8. Song D, et al. Timing Analysis of Keystrokes and Timing Attacks on SSH. Proceedings of the 10thConference
on USENIX Security Symposium 2001;vol. 10.
9. AES Key Wrap Speciﬁcation. http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit/documents/kms/AES_key_wrap.pdf
10. Counter with CBC-MAC (CCM). Network Working Group, Request for Comments: 3610 (September 2003).Embedded Cryptography 287

--- Page 298 ---
11. NIST Special Publication 800-38C. Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: the CCM Mode
for Authentication and Conﬁdentiality (May 2004).
12. Vinodh G, et al. Optimized Galois-Counter-Mode Implementation on Intel Architecture Processors (April
2010).
13. Kleinjung, Thorsten, et al. Factorization of a 768-Bit RSA Modulus, version 1.4 (February 18, 2010), http://
eprint.iacr.org/2010/006.pdf
14. NIST Special Publication 800-57. Recommendation for Key Management dPart 1: General (Revised) (March
2007).
15. Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certiﬁcate and Certiﬁcate Revocation List (CRL) Proﬁle, Internet
Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 5280 (May 2008).
16. Suite B Certiﬁcate and Certiﬁcate Revocation List (CRL) Proﬁle, Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 5759 January 2010.
17. SEC 4: Elliptic Curve Qu-Vanstone Implicit Certiﬁcate Scheme (ECQV), Version 0.97, Certicom Research
(March 2011).
18. Xiaoyun W, Lisa Y, Hongbo Y . Finding Collisions in the Full SHA-1 (February 2005). Proceedings of Crypto
Core.
19. Xiaoyun W, Andrew CY , Frances Y. Cryptanalysis on SHA-1, Presented by Adi Shamir at the Rump Session
of CRYPTO 2005.
20. Secure Hash Standard. Federal Information Processing Publication 180-2 (August 1, 2002).
21. HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication, Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 2104 (February 1997).
22. NIST FIPS PUB 198. The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) (2002), http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/ﬁps/ﬁps198/ﬁps-198a.pdf
23. NIST Special Publication 800-22dRevision 1a. A Statistical Test Suite for Random and Pseudorandom
Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications (April 2010).
24. Annex C: Approved Random Number Generators for FIPS PUB 140-2, Security Requirements for
Cryptographic Modules (DRAFT) (June 14, 2011).
25. NIST Special Publication 800-90A dRevision 1. Recommendation for Random Number Generation Using
Deterministic Bit Generators (Revised) (May 2011).
26. ANSI X9.82-3-2007. Random Number Generation dPart 3: Deterministic Random Bit Generators (September
2007).
27. Oswald D, Paar C. Breaking Mifare DESFire MF3ICD40: Power Analysis and Templates in the Real World.
CHES 2011, Nara ; September 30, 2011.
28. International Telecommunications Union. Telecommunication Standardization Sector, G.729: Coding of
Speed at 8 kbit/s Using Conjugate-Structure Algebraic-Code-Excited Linear Prediction (CS-ACELP) (January
2007).
29. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 140-2: Security Requirements for Cryptographic
Modules, National Institute of Standards and Technology (May 2001).
30. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 140-2: Security Requirements for Cryptographic
Modules, (January 11, 1994).
31. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 140-3: Security Requirements for Cryptographic
Modules (Revised DRAFT) (September 11, 2009).
32. Annex F: Non-Invasive Attack Methods for FIPS PUB 140-3 (Draft), Security Requirements for
Cryptographic Modules, NIST Computer Security Division (September 10, 2009).288 Chapter 4

--- Page 299 ---
CHAPTER 5
Data Protection Protocols for Embedded
Systems
Chapter Outline
5.1 Introduction 290
5.2 Data-in-Motion Protocols 291
5.2.1 Generalized Model 291
5.2.1.1 Point-to-Point 291
5.2.1.2 Point-to-Multipoint 295
5.2.2 Choosing the Network Layer for Security 2965.2.3 Ethernet Security Protocols 297
5.2.3.1 802.1X 298
5.2.3.2 802.11i 299
5.2.3.3 WPA2 3005.2.3.4 802.1AE 301
5.2.4 IPsec versus SSL 3015.2.5 IPsec 303
5.2.5.1 Integrated versus Bump-in-the-Stack 3035.2.5.2 IPsec RFCs 3035.2.5.3 IKE 305
5.2.5.4 IPsec Hardware Offload 306
5.2.5.5 IPsec for Very Low Power Devices 3075.2.5.6 HAIPE 310
5.2.6 SSL/TLS 310
5.2.6.1 OpenSSL 3105.2.6.2 GnuTLS 311
5.2.7 Embedded VPN Clients 313
5.2.7.1 Openswan and Racoon2 313
5.2.7.2 OpenVPN 314
5.2.8 DTLS 315
5.2.9 SSH 315
5.2.9.1 Additional Protocols Based on SSH 3165.2.9.2 OpenSSH 316
5.2.10 Custom Network Security Protocols 316
5.2.10.1 Traffic Flow Confidentiality 318
5.2.11 Application of Cryptography within Network Security Protocols 319
5.2.11.1 NSA Suite B Guidance 319
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00005-9
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 289

--- Page 300 ---
5.2.12 Secure Multimedia Protocols 320
5.2.12.1 Signaling Protocols 321
5.2.12.2 Multimedia Transport Protocols 322
5.2.13 Broadcast Security 324
5.2.13.1 Single TEK 3265.2.13.2 Group TEKs 326
5.2.13.3 Single KEK 3275.2.13.4 KEK Per Receiver 328
5.2.13.5 Single KEK with Group TEKs 329
5.3 Data-at-Rest Protocols 330
5.3.1 Choosing the Storage Layer for Security 332
5.3.2 Symmetric Encryption Algorithm Selection 334
5.3.2.1 Tweakable Ciphers 3355.3.2.2 XTS-AES 336
5.3.3 Managing the Storage Encryption Key 338
5.3.3.1 Generating the Storage Encryption Key 3385.3.3.2 Remote Key Provisioning 339
5.3.3.3 Key Escrow 339
5.3.4 Advanced Threats to Data Encryption Solutions 340
5.4 Key Points 342
5.5 Bibliography and Notes 345
5.1 Introduction
Many modern embedded systems have data-in-motion (network security) or data-at-rest
(encrypted storage) protection requirements, driven by embedded intellectual propertyprotection, secure remote management, digital rights management, ﬁnancial transactions inInternet-connected devices, and more. This chapter focuses on the policies of dataconﬁdentiality, integrity, and origin authentication, since they are common to almost all dataprotection protocols. Notably absent from this discussion is a data access control policy, whichtends to be application- or media-type speciﬁc and has less general applicability froma protocol perspective.
This chapter provides an overview of the l atest and most important network security
protocols such as TLS v1.2, DTLS, and IKE v2. In addition, the chapter discusses the far
less standardized approaches to protecting data-at-rest, such as the use of full diskencryption (FDE). The chapter demonstrates how to make practical use of these tools inembedded systems and provides useful advice regarding performance, footprint, andcertiﬁcation standards such as NSA Suite B. This chapter is intended for embedded systemsengineers (software, hardware, systems) who either have minimal experience in using dataprotection protocols or have a general understanding but lack practical experienceintegrating these features into embedded systems. The material is also useful for more290 Chapter 5

--- Page 301 ---
experienced network security engineers who want to brush up on the latest standards
revisions and expert guidance.
This chapter assumes basic understanding of cryptography, including symmetric encryption
algorithms, public key cryptography, and key management concepts. These topics are coveredin Chapter 4.
5.2 Data-in-Motion Protocols
Data-in-motion (also referred to as data-in-transit) security protocols are involved in theestablishment and use of protected channels over which a pair (point-to-point) or set (point-to-multipoint or multipoint-to-multipoint) of entities can communicate securely. We concernourselves primarily with Internet Protocol (IP)-based network security.
5.2.1 Generalized Model
5.2.1.1 Point-to-Point
Let’s assume Alice wants to establish a protected channel with Bob. At a high level, Alice and
Bob both employ a control program to initially establish the channel and a data program tosubsequently send bulk information across the established channel (see Figure 5.1 ). When
Alice and Bob are ﬁnished with their communication session, the channel is torn down (thiscleanup is considered part of the control program).
To drill down a bit further, let’s assume that public key cryptography is used for session
establishment, and that prior to any sessions, Alice already holds Bob’s validated long-term(static) public key, Bob holds Alice’s validated long-term (static) public key, and they want to
Figure 5.1:
High-level generalized model of point-to-point secure communication subsystems.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 291

--- Page 302 ---
communicate only with each other (they will never obtain any other public keys). By
“validated,” we mean that Alice and Bob share a common certiﬁcation authority (CA) whosepre-installed certiﬁcate is used to validate each other’s public keys in advance. For example,Alice and Bob may receive each other’s public key certiﬁcates from a trusted certiﬁcate serveron the network. Note that in some embedded systems, the communication peers’ public keysmay be pre-installed at the factory in a trusted manner. In this case, Alice and Bob need notvalidate each other’s public keys at all, and no shared common certiﬁcate authority public keyneed be pre-installed.
Figure 5.2 shows a generalized authentication and key agreement sequence used to establish
a channel between Alice and Bob for secure bulk data transmission.In step one, Alice creates a random, unpredictable ephemeral public key pair (e.g., RSA or
elliptic curve) and sends the public part, P
A, to Bob. Alice keeps the other part, S A, private. Bob
receives P Aand also creates a random ephemeral public key pair (S B,PB). In step two, Bob
sends P Band the digital signature of a concatenation of the two exchanged public keys, P Aand
PB. Bob creates this signature, referred to as Sign BinFigure 5.2 , using his static private key
(remember that Alice already holds the matched public portion). The signature algorithmcorresponds to the types of static public keys used (e.g., RSA or ECDSA). Alice receives thismessage and validates Bob’s signature using Bob’s static public key. In step three, Alice signsa concatenation of P
Band P Aand sends the result to Bob. Bob receives and validates the
signature using Alice’s static public key.
Figure 5.2:
Generalized point-to-point secure data-in-motion protocol.292 Chapter 5

--- Page 303 ---
We’re almost done with the session establishment. Alice and Bob have exchanged ephemeral
public keys and can therefore use the elegant and powerful Difﬁe-Hellman algorithm (refer toChapter 4) to create a shared secret computed from their retained ephemeral private key and thereceived public key. The speciﬁc form of Difﬁe-Hellman depends on the type of ephemeralkeys used, e.g., standard Difﬁe-Hellman or Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman (ECDH) when usingelliptic curve ephemeral keys. Because it is computed from private keys held only by Alice andBob, the shared secret can now be used as a symmetric key for bulk-authenticated encryption(e.g., AES-GCM). Alice and Bob can communicate conﬁdently using this key, knowing that noone other than Alice and Bob can possibly read the data.
Let’s look at the common goals of a data-in-motion protocol and how the preceding sequence
satisﬁes each:
Mutual authentication: Bob’ ssignature
 on P A,which he sends in step two, provides
assurance to Alice that she is indeed communicating with her intended recipient, Bob.Alice’s signature on P
Bin step three provides the same assurance for Bob. Thus, Bob and
Alice have mutually authenticated.Liveness: Because Alice’s P
Ais unpredictable (random), the signature of P Areturned by
Bob demonstrates to Alice that Bob is actively participating in the conversation (nota replay of an earlier communication). Similarly, Alice’s signature of P
Bproves Alice’s
liveness to Bob.Key Agreement: Bob and Alice have computed the same fresh, private key by which
they can subsequently securely communicate. A corollary to key agreement is key
conﬁrmation in which Alice and Bob actually have evidence that the other party has
computed the shared secret key. In our generalized scenario, conﬁrmation is not achieveduntil bulk data is sent and then successfully received (authenticated and decrypted).Because the whole point of data-in-motion protocols is to use the secret key forcommunications, an explicit key conﬁrmation step during the establishment process isnot strictly necessary.
Key Point
Identity anonymity (part of transmission security) is often a desired goal of data-in-motion
protocols.
In the preceding sequence, the key exchange messages and their corresponding signatures are
sent in the clear. An eavesdropper who holds a copy of Alice’s and Bob’s public keys (weusually must assume this is possible since the keys are public) can validate the messages anddetermine that Alice and Bob are communicating. Identity anonymity can easily be added tothe preceding sequence. Because he has Alice’s ephemeral public key, Bob can compute theshared secret prior to sending the return message in step two. Therefore, Bob encrypts theData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 293

--- Page 304 ---
signature in this message, thwarting the eavesdropper. Similarly, Alice can compute the shared
secret prior to sending the message in step three. She too encrypts the signature.
In practice, depending on the underlying transport medium (e.g., Internet Protocol on top of
Ethernet), identity information may be deduced from those transport packets if thecommunicating identities can be mapped to their network locations. As we discuss later in thischapter in the example of IPsec Tunnel mode, addressing anonymity may need to be addressedindependently.
The simpliﬁed model discussed so far assumed that Alice and Bob can only ever talk to each
other. In practice, Alice and Bob are but two constituents in a larger network with more entities.In a closed network with a manageable number of entities (for example, a corporate intranet),each endpoint can be pre-installed with the list of potential communicating partners, andidentity information must be exchanged in the protocol to inform Alice and Bob which publickeys to use for message validation. In an open network with a virtually unlimited number ofentities (e.g., the Internet), public key certiﬁcates are usually sent as part of the handshake. Inother words, before Alice can talk to Bob, Alice will send not her simple identity but rather herentire public key certiﬁcate, and Bob will need to validate that signature during theestablishment process. Similarly, Bob will respond with his certiﬁcate.
The improved sequence, including encryption of the signatures and transmission of certiﬁcates,
is shown in Figure 5.3 .
Figure 5.3:
Generalized point-to-point network security protocol with improved transmission security.294 Chapter 5

--- Page 305 ---
While other details are elided in this generalized model of data-in-motion point-to-point secure
communication, it forms the basis of modern public key point-to-point network securityprotocols, such as IKE/IPsec, SSL, and DTLS, discussed later in this chapter.
For adventurous readers wishing to deep dive on the history, variety, and formal proofs of key
establishment methods, we recommend the excellent book Protocols for Authentication and
Key Establishment .
1
5.2.1.2 Point-to-Multipoint
Suppose that Alice wants to communicate securely to a large number of receivers. Establishing
a point-to-point session with each receiver may not be practical and would certainly beinefﬁcient, requiring the same data to be sent over and over. An example of an embeddedsystems problem requiring point-to-multipoint is communicating a remote managementchange (conﬁguration modiﬁcation, ﬁrmware update) to a large number of deployed systems.When multicast communications are used (the data is sent once and the underlying mediumhandles getting the data to all receivers in the speciﬁed multicast group), the control portionbecomes rather complicated. Instead of a simple key exchange protocol, a group keymanagement scheme must be used. This scheme must handle periodic rekeying across thegroup.
Key Point
Multipoint applications force key management and exchange challenges to be decoupled from
the bulk data protocols: the developer must ﬁnd a way to distribute a shared key across the groupand then multicast packets protected with that key.
Readers interested in learning more about multicast with IPsec should consult RFCs 5374 and
4046.2,3The IPsec discussion later in this chapter focuses only on the traditional point-to-point
case.
Broadcast is a special case of point-to-multipoint in which communication is strictly one way
(e.g., a satellite transmission to terrestrial receivers). Broadcast makes traditional IP-basednetwork security protocols even more impractical due the inability to exchange any messages.Once again, a pre-shared key must be established between broadcaster and receivers, and thenthe data encrypted with the pre-shared key can be signed and encrypted prior to broadcast. Thisis how paid cable and satellite content is sent between service provider and a large number ofhomes. Broadcast approaches are discussed later in this chapter.
Conferences are the quintessential example of multipoint-to-multipoint: all participants need
to communicate with all other participants. However, information is generated individually byeach participant; therefore, this scenario is simply a special case of multiple concurrent point-to-multipoint connections.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 295

--- Page 306 ---
5.2.2 Choosing the Network Layer for Security
As shown in Figure 5.4, the embedded systems designer can choose among the different
layers in the communications stack for applying data protection protocols. Due to
performance efﬁciency concerns, most systems will want to apply protection at a singlelevel.
Key Point
Multi-layered data protection may be used as a defense-in-depth strategy and can also occur
when upper layers are unaware or distrustful of lower-layer protection capabilities.
As expected, the practical protocol choices vary depending on the selected layer.
Key Point
Choice of network protection layer can have signiﬁcant impact on functionality, performance,interoperability, and maintainability.
Understanding these trade-offs is an important goal of this chapter.
The lowest available choice for network security is the data link layer of the OSI model and/or
the link layer of the TCP/IP model. Each data link typedBluetooth, Ethernet, Modem, ATM,
Figure 5.4:
Network security protection possibilities by layer.296 Chapter 5

--- Page 307 ---
IEEE 802.15.4, Frame Relay (just to name a few) dusually incorporates a distinct data
protection approach tailored to its framing and control characteristics. Sometimes, data link
encryption is built directly into the communications peripheral hardware.
Key Point
The efﬁcient protocol handling and encryption in hardware and the lack of spare applications
processing and storage resources force certain embedded systems to rely on data link layer
protection rather than more ﬂexible upper-layer choices.
A good example of this is an ultra-low-power wireless device such as a smart meter.
Contemporary ZigBee-enabled devices rely almost exclusively on data link layer security tomaintain optimal battery life and good network performance over low-rate radios.
Key management approaches may also differ widely based on layer. For example, data link
layer protocols tend to use simplistic key management schemes. In some ZigBee networks,a single shared symmetric key is used for the entire network; periodic rekeying requiresreﬂashing and may never be performed in practice; the key is factory installed into anadministrative device on the network; and endpoint devices are sent the shared key over the air,in the clear. Those who have read Chapter 4 (or even those who have not), we hope, see lots ofweaknesses with this key management scheme.
Key Point
The biggest drawback of link layer data protection is that, by deﬁnition, the scheme can work only
on a network consisting of devices using the homogeneous data link media.
Therefore, a ZigBee-based smart meter is unable to obtain a direct, secured connection with the
back-end power infrastructure that resides across the WAN. The only practical way to get anend-to-end secure connection between these entities is to go up to a higher level such as IPsecover 6LoWPAN (more on this later).
5.2.3 Ethernet Security Protocols
The remainder of this chapter focuses on the upper-level protocols, such as IPsec, due totheir more general applicability. However, before we go there, one form of data link layersecurity bears mentioning: the key management and session establishment as well as thebulk encryption protocols, respectively, for Ethernet (both wired and wireless). Ethernet,especially wireless (Wi-Fi), is one of the most common data link types in embeddedsystems.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 297

--- Page 308 ---
5.2.3.1 802.1X
Key Point
The IEEE 802.1X standard deﬁnes requirements for the secure joining of endpoints into Ethernet
networks.
An 802.1X authenticator device acts as the gateway, rejecting all Ethernet trafﬁc (except for the
802.1X connection requests) not originating from a properly authenticated endpoint. The802.1X authenticator is often a relatively simple device, such as an Ethernet switch or Wi-Fiaccess point. The authentication decision logic is usually ofﬂoaded to an authentication serverwithin the LAN, which may in turn take advantage of additional servers such as a usercredential database. In 802.1X terminology, the requesting endpoint is called the supplicant.
4
The three-way supplicant, authenticator, authentication server architecture of 802.1X is showninFigure 5.5 .
A protocol framework for authentication, Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), isspeciﬁed in 802.1X. However, speciﬁc authentication methods used on a particular network arenot prescribed by 802.1X. EAP is deﬁned in RFCs 3748 and 5247.
5,6Authentication may be as
simple as validating that the supplicant’s Ethernet MAC address exists on a whitelist of allowedendpoints or as comprehensive as a dual scheme requiring valid username/password andmutual public key certiﬁcate-based authentication.
Figure 5.5:
IEEE 802.1X entities architecture.298 Chapter 5

--- Page 309 ---
More than 40 EAP methods have been deﬁned over the years, and speciﬁc EAP methods are
required to claim conformance to certain standards. For example, RFC 4017 deﬁnes therequired EAP method requirements for IEEE 802.11 wireless networks.
7
Plenty of detailed information about 802.1X is available in books and on the Internet. Onesuggested title is Jim Geier’s Implementing 802.1X Security Solutions for Wired and Wireless
Networks.
8
5.2.3.2 802.11i
Key Point
The mapping of Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) requirements to wireless Ethernet
LANs and other wireless Ethernet security requirements are deﬁned in IEEE 802.11i-2004.
802.11i incorporates the 802.1X standard for authentication.9The generalized model for point-
to-point connections presented earlier in this chapter, including strong mutual authentication,
freshly agreed session keys, and liveness, are all covered by 802.11i. However, 802.11i datasecurity is aimed at the link between the endpoint and the access point, not between the accesspoint and the other end of the logical communication, behind the access point.
Key Point
The security functions speciﬁed in IEEE 802.11i protect against local eavesdroppers and hackers
trying to gain access to a network via the access point but do not provide end-to-end protection.
Embedded systems designers must use a VPN or other higher-level protocol to connect the
embedded system to a back-end network, even when 802.11i is in use. We must not trust thepublic networks (e.g., the Internet) that lie between the access point and the back-end systems.In fact, one could argue that a network that is strongly guarded with a VPN concentrator thatenforces strong mutual authentication to all remote endpoints (that execute an appropriatelyconﬁgured VPN client) need not use data link security at all within those connections. This isa bit different from the use of mobile smartphones and laptops where the endpoint is used bothfor VPN connections as well as public Wi-Fi connections that both require data security.
At the time of this writing, 802.11i speciﬁes the use of AES-CCM, an authenticated
encryption mode discussed in Chapter 4, for data conﬁdentiality and integrity protection.802.11i’s speciﬁcation regarding how AES-CCM is applied to 802.11 Ethernet frames iscalled Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol(CCMP). It is interesting to note that AES-GCM, preferred by NSA Suite B in higher-levelprotocols, is not yet adopted in data link security protocols. At the time of this writing, thescope of NSA Suite B does not include data link security, implying a preference for IPsec andData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 299

--- Page 310 ---
other higher-layer approaches. As wireless Ethernet speeds continue to increase, there is
a good chance that AES-GCM will be added to IEEE 802.11 standards due to GCM’s superiorperformance efﬁciency.
Data link security is generally more important in wireless than in wired LANs. Wireless
networks are characterized by more dynamic topologies, where the network regularly is joinedby endpoints that may not be well managed by the network’s administrators. Wireless networksare more susceptible to eavesdropping and other man-in-the-middle attacks. Finally, wirelessnetworks are simply replacing wired networks in most embedded applications due to theirﬂexibility. The foundational standard for wireless Ethernet security, 802.11i is required readingfor serious wireless Ethernet security implementers.
The Wi-Fi Alliance has been at the forefront of certiﬁcation for security compliance and
interoperability for wireless Ethernet (Wi-Fi) networks. The Wi-Fi Alliance bases its currentcertiﬁcation testing on IEEE 802.11i.
5.2.3.3 WPA2
Key Point
Contrary to popular belief, Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) is not a deﬁnitive security standard,
but rather a certiﬁcation quasi-standard intended to provide industry with conﬁdence that Wi-Fi-certiﬁed devices meet the requirements of IEEE 802.11i.
The Wi-Fi Alliance introduced WPA2 certiﬁcation in 2004, concurrent with the release of
IEEE 802.11i. WPA2 has been mandated for Wi-Fi-certiﬁed products since 2006 and replacesWEP and WPA, notoriously weaker technical approaches adopted by the Alliance certiﬁcation
program.
A good overview of the Wi-Fi Alliance’s adoption of security standards culminating in today’s
WPA2 certiﬁcation can be found on the Wi-Fi Alliance website.
10The Wi-Fi Alliance’s
inﬂuence on wireless Ethernet security is so ubiquitous that most users of wireless Ethernetdevices equate wireless Ethernet security with the WPA2 name rather than its constituent IEEEprotocol standards.
Key Point
Embedded systems developers acquiring wireless Ethernet software for incorporation into devices
should select stacks that not only claim conformance to WPA2, but have also have been
successfully deployed in Wi-Fi-certiﬁed products.
Note that Wi-Fi Alliance certiﬁcation is performed only on end products.300 Chapter 5

--- Page 311 ---
5.2.3.4 802.1AE
Key Point
Known as MACsec, the IEEE 802.1AE standard is the analog of IEEE 802.11i for wired Ethernet
(IEEE 802.3) networks.11
Unlike 802.11i, which mandates use of 802.1X for joining networks, the scope of MACsec
includes only the data plane, excluding network access authentication. However, draft standardIEEE P802.1af augmented 802.1X with the details necessary for application to 802.1AE. Thisdraft has been incorporated into the next revision of 802.1X, 802.1X-2010, not yet ﬁnalized by
IEEE at the time of this writing. The 802.1X standard will become the de facto wired Ethernet
endpoint-to-switch authentication protocol since it enables back-end networks to implementa uniﬁed authentication server infrastructure (using RADIUS and EAP) for both wired andwireless endpoints.
The authors of 802.1AE were thoughtful enough about the rapidly increasing speeds of wired
Ethernet (100 gigabit maximum as of the time of this writing, with some demand for 400gigabit and even terabit
12) to make AES-GCM, rather than AES-CCM, the mandatory default
cipher for this standard.
In summary, data link protocols are appropriate for connecting embedded systems within
homogeneous physical networks that require simple key management and efﬁcientencryption processing. And data link security is better than no data-in-transit security if theembedded system is unable to sustain higher-level protocols such as IPsec. Ethernet securityprotocols are, of course, critical to developers of Ethernet switch and access pointequipment.
Key Point
Developers looking for the most portable, ﬂexible, and extensible data-in-motion security should
look above the data link layer toward the network (IP) and higher layers.
5.2.4 IPsec versus SSL
The two most commonly used network security protocol families in embedded systems are
IPsec and the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). At a high level, these protocols fulﬁll the samesecurity goals: conﬁdentiality of transmitted data, integrity protection of transmitted data, andauthentication of data origin.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 301

--- Page 312 ---
The major difference between the two families is the level in the network stack at which they
operate.
Key Point
IPsec operates at layer three (the Internet Protocol layer), making it invisible to both higher-level
protocols (e.g., TCP) as well as applications.
Key Point
SSL and its modern variant, Transport Layer Security (TLS), operate on layer four, the transportlayer; it is common for applications to use TLS by invoking a sockets-like API.
Key Point
A major advantage of TLS is that it can take advantage of TCP’s guaranteed in-order packet
delivery to simplify the protocol relative to IPsec that must handle dropped messages and out-of-
order delivery.
Key Point
The use of TLS enables applications to select when they need the security (and are willing to paythe associated overhead).
For example, web browsers use TLS to secure web trafﬁc. In contrast, once an IPsec
connection is made, all applications and services running on that network connection will beforced to abide by the underlying policy.
Key Point
An important advantage of IPsec is that applications can derive security beneﬁts without
requiring any application-level decisions or code modiﬁcations (such as adjusting to usea modiﬁed-sockets API).302 Chapter 5

--- Page 313 ---
5.2.5 IPsec
5.2.5.1 Integrated versus Bump-in-the-Stack
IPsec is optional in IP version four (IPv4) and mandated in IP version six (IPv6). Most
commercial network stacks, either third party or those built into operating systems, have IPsecalready pre-integrated.
Some embedded software vendors supply a standalone IPsec that can run independently of an
already-existing network communication subsystem; this architecture is called “bump-in-the-stack” (BITS) because the IPsec component is a separate layer (“bump”) between the higher-level stack and the lower-level data link layer (e.g., Ethernet). Generally speaking, if anorganization is already using a TCP/IP stack with integrated IPsec, then it should takeadvantage of that stack. Otherwise, using BITS may be a good choice due to simplicity, smallerfootprint, and ease of integration, although it may not perform quite as well as a well-tunedstack implementation.
Key Point
An example of a good choice for bump-in-the-stack (BITS) IPsec is a virtualized environment
where guest operating systems already have integrated network stacks, yet there is a desire to
implement network security outside the virtual machine where ﬂaws in guest operating systemscould derail intended security.
The hypervisor can implement its own BITS IPsec layer (see Figure 5.6 ) below all the guest
operating systems, even without the knowledge of the guest and its applications.
IPsec is often generalized to refer to the coordinated use of two separate protocols: IPsec
and Internet Key Exchange (IKE). IPsec is concerned with the bulk ﬂow of encryptedpackets between network endpoints, whereas IKE deals with the thorny issues aroundkey management and establishing the initial authenticated connection between nodes.IKE works with IPsec by establishing an ephemeral bulk encryption key (calleda session key) for each new connection and then notifying the IPsec layer of the sessionkeys to use.
5.2.5.2 IPsec RFCsIPsec has been standardized for a long time with minor revisions. The original RFCs were
published in 1998 and updated in 2005. RFC 4301 is the top-level IPsec standard, coveringboth IPv4 and IPv6.
13While it can be somewhat painful, reading the RFCs mentioned
throughout this chapter is highly recommended for developers who want to gain a reasonableunderstanding of the protocols instead of just using them.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 303

--- Page 314 ---
IPsec speciﬁes two major sub-variants: Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating
Security Payload (ESP). These protocols are covered by RFCs 4302 and 4303,respectively.
14,15AH is used only for integrity protection and origin authentication. Because
IPsec is usually employed for conﬁdential communications, AH is rarely used; rather, ESP isthe most interesting variant.
ESP has two modes of operation: Transport and Tunnel. Transport mode is intended for host-
to-host connections (as opposed to host-to-gateway and gateway-to-gateway) and does not hidethe original IP packet’s header information.
In contrast, Tunnel mode fully encapsulates the original IP packet inside a new IP packet with
completely new headers. Tunneling enables encrypted information to travel across opennetworks, such as the Internet; the outer headers and associated addressing are used to route thedata between the VPN endpoints (client endpoint and server/concentrator) across the opennetwork (see Figure 5.7 ).
Figure 5.7:
VPN tunneling.
Figure 5.6:
Use of bump-in-the-stack ipsec in a virtual machine environment.304 Chapter 5

--- Page 315 ---
In addition to encrypting packet data, the original IP address information is hidden (encrypted)
on the network.
Key Point
ESP Tunnel mode is the IPsec combination of choice when maximum security and conﬁdentiality
are required.
The encapsulation of an input IP packet into an IPsec ESP Tunnel mode packet is depicted in
Figure 5.8 . The trailing authentication data is used to verify data integrity of the encapsulated
frame and the ESP header that helps to manage the security association between sender andreceiver.
Tunnel mode adds more network overhead than Transport mode due to the new IP header.
Transport and Tunnel modes are covered in detail within the aforementioned IPsec RFCs.
5.2.5.3 IKEInternet Key Exchange follows the generalized model for secure connection establishment
discussed at the start of this chapter. The peer who wants to establish a secure connection witha remote host sends the host its identiﬁcation information (e.g., public key certiﬁcate) as wellas some unique data used to validate that the messages are live (not replayed from an earliersession) and as a seed to a session key establishment algorithm. The initiator also signs data toassert its origin. The recipient peer will verify the signature to authenticate the initiator andthen send back its signed data, random, and identiﬁcation information for the converseoperation. Each peer computes session keys based on the exchanged data and an agreedalgorithm, typically a variant of Difﬁe-Hellman. These keys are passed down to the IPsecmodules for the session communications.
Figure 5.8:
IPsec ESP tunnel mode encapsulation.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 305

--- Page 316 ---
IKE is also able to perform rekeying.
Key Point
In general, an IKE/IPsec or TLS session key’s lifetime (called the cryptoperiod) should be limited
and a new session key re-established to limit the damage should a session key be compromised.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) provides cryptoperiod
guidance in its special publication 800-57,16but ultimately, proper choice of cryptoperiod
depends on the amount of data used for a single key as well as the time-prorated value ofthat data. For tactical data whose value degrades almost immediately after use,a cryptoperiod can be relatively long because a compromised key will give an attackeraccess only to stale information. For strategic data with a long lifetime (think nuclearweapons control codes), a cryptoperiod may be far shorter than in NIST guidance. Somenetwork security implementations may not give the designer an ability to customize thecryptoperiod. When selecting network security products, the designer should consult thevendor and/or product documentation to understand whether this important characteristicis conﬁgurable.
IKE version 1 (IKEv1) is covered by RFC 2409,
17and it is slowly being replaced by IKEv2
(RFC 4306), which ﬁxes some important problems.18IKEv2 is not interoperable with IKEv1,
making it difﬁcult to use on its own unless the developer is conﬁdent that peers will always
support the newer version. Yet the alternative is to use an older protocol that is known to havesecurity ﬂaws and inefﬁciencies.
Key Point
Generally speaking, if sufﬁcient interoperability can be assured, IKEv2 is strongly recommended
over IKEv1.
In late 2010, a new RFC for IKEv2 was published, RFC 5996, whose main purpose is
clarifying and amplifying various aspects of the predecessor RFC 4306 speciﬁcation that havemet with some confusion over the intervening ﬁve years of use.
19
5.2.5.4 IPsec Hardware Ofﬂoad
Increasingly, sophisticated embedded processors are incorporating security engines that can
accelerate the performance of IPsec dramatically while ofﬂoading this work from the primaryCPU. This is particularly important in embedded systems where processing power is oftentightly constrained. The security engine also decreases and simpliﬁes the network securitysoftware content, reducing overall memory requirements.306 Chapter 5

--- Page 317 ---
For example, most modern multi-core network processors, including most of the Freescale QorIQ
and the Cavium OCTEON family processors, have IPsec ofﬂoad engines. Acceleration mayinclude either of or both the public and bulk symmetric key cryptographic portions of IKE/IPsec.
5.2.5.4.1 Flow-through versus Lookaside
The QorIQ and OCTEON processors also provide good examples of the two different IPsecofﬂoad hardware approaches and programming models. The QorIQ has a single, feature-richsecurity engine that provides security services on behalf of all the general processor cores(eight PowerPCs in the case of the P4080 product). The P4080’s security engine provides ﬂow-
through capability, which means that the ofﬂoad engine can handle the bulk IPsec processing
with little or no intervention of the CPU cores. Once IKE key material has been established andprogrammed into the engine, it will perform all the cryptographic algorithms (encryption,decryption, and integrity protection) as well as the IPsec header processing, such as adding theIPsec ESP packet headers and trailers. The P4080 provides ofﬂoad support for other networksecurity protocols, including TLS.
The Cavium OCTEON has a security ofﬂoad processor built into each general-purpose core
(up to 16 for the OCTEON 58xx family). However, the OCTEON provides lookaside
processing instead of ﬂow-through. This means that the engine ofﬂoads the heavyweight
encryption processing but must rely on the main application cores for other IPsec protocoltasks, such as header and trailer processing and packet parsing and classiﬁcation (identifyingwhich tunnel’s conﬁguration, or security association, should be used for an incoming packet).The efﬁcacy of either approach depends on the application and system requirements. Becauseits IPsec processing power scales with the number of cores, the OCTEON is able to achievesuperior aggregate throughput. However, the P4080 is able to achieve its excellent performancewithout impacting the main cores.
Many Intel Architecture processors incorporate AES-NI , specialized instructions for
accelerating AES. A lookaside approach, AES-NI claims the added beneﬁt of avoiding local
memory-based side channel attacks that have plagued software-only AES implementations.
Figure 5.9 illustrates how the hardware/software boundary differs between pure software
IPsec, lookaside, and ﬂow-through implementations. Note that some accelerators will have the
line drawn in slightly different places. For example, a lookaside accelerator could handleportions of IPsec header processor or none at all. Furthermore, note that ﬂow-through enginesmay require software key exchange via IKE, and others may actually handle the IKEnegotiation as well. IKE is elided from Figure 5.9 .
5.2.5.5 IPsec for Very Low Power Devices
The global smart energy initiative has raised concerns about the ability of power companies
and their suppliers to provide adequate network security for a new generation of smartData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 307

--- Page 318 ---
appliances, smart meters, gateways, and grid data centers as well as the home/personal area
networks (HANs/PANs) and neighborhood area networks (NANs) that are being deployed toconnect them. IPv6 is of enormous importance due to the desire to connect, ultimately, billionsof smart energy network endpoints. However, a full-featured, RFC-conformant IKE/IPsecimplementation is very sophisticated and not a good ﬁt for a low-cost, battery-powered smartsensor armed with a microcontroller and its tens of kilobytes of ﬂash and RAM talking toa low-rate, small-packet-size 802.15.4-based wireless network.
In fact, today’s Zigbee-based devices use rudimentary data link layer security that has proven
trivial to break (e.g., private symmetric keys provisioned over the network in the clear). Inessence, designers are asserting that the security perimeter is best enforced at the gateway andthat the threat to the HAN or perhaps even the NAN is not worth worrying about.
Yet some are looking past this stance to a future in which protecting the home from hackers
will be critical. One promising standard for very low power devices is 6LoWPAN (RFC 4944),
which speciﬁes a compression scheme for IPv6 (and by implication, IPsec) to enable its useover 802.15.4 networks.
20Unfortunately, 6LoWPAN (and IP networking in general) is
incompatible with the current generation of ZigBee; however, 6LoWPAN is speciﬁed in ISA100.11a,
21an open standard for wireless communication in industrial automation and process
control systems, and the ZigBee Smart Energy Proﬁle 2.0 Technical RequirementsDocument,
22which is intended to result in a new ZigBee Smart Energy Proﬁle speciﬁcation.
Many 802.15.4 applications use UDP, rather than TCP, for transport. For example, an energymonitoring system might receive periodic, drop-tolerant datagrams sent from endpoint energy
Figure 5.9:
IPsec ofﬂoad comparison.308 Chapter 5

--- Page 319 ---
sensors. As shown in Figure 5.10 , 6LoWPAN-compliant UDP/IPv6 packet format enables
compression of numerous ﬁelds, including the source and destination IPv6 addresses (at 128
bits each, the worst footprint offenders), IP version (six, implied), payload length (inferredfrom the data link layer), trafﬁc class, ﬂow label, and source and destination UDP ports.
Key Point
In the best case of a non-routable (local) packet, 6LoWPAN can reduce the UDP/IPv6 header size to
just 4 bytes (relative to the usual 48); the best case for routable packets yields a header size of 11 bytes.
Figure 5.10:
Comparison of 6LoWPAN and standard IPv6 header sizes for routable packets.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 309

--- Page 320 ---
An excellent source of information about 6LoWPAN can be found in 6LoWPAN, The Wireless
Embedded Internet , by Shelby and Bormann.23
5.2.5.6 HAIPE
In 2004, NSA opted to create a customized version of IPsec protocol because of security
concerns with commercial standards. The High-Assurance Internet Protocol Encryptor(HAIPE) standard (well, at least it’s an NSA standard) is used for NSA-certiﬁed Type 1 virtualprivate network (VPN) systems. While based on IKE and IPsec, HAIPE is not interoperable.While traditional IPsec is a point-to-point protocol, HAIPE supports point-to-multipoint(multicast) using a pre-established group key in addition to its more common point-to-pointapplication.
The initial HAIPE speciﬁcation only called for classiﬁed algorithms (Suite A); however,
subsequent revisions added a Suite B option to allow future interoperability between Type 1products and Suite B (unclassiﬁed) products. Due to the IKEv2 and guidelines for use of SuiteB cryptography in IKEv2 and IPsec, NSA has stated that HAIPE will eventually be replacedwith IKEv2/IPsec for all Type 1 Suite B products. These products will interoperate with othercommercial equipment provided they also follow the harmonized IPsec protocol and usea common PKI.
5.2.6 SSL/TLS
Secure Sockets Layer was invented by Netscape and had three major versions (SSL v1, v2, andv3) before it was replaced by the similar but improved Transport Layer Security (TLS)protocol, which itself is on its third revision at the time of this writing. TLS versions are deﬁnedin RFCs 2246 (Version 1.0, 1999),
244346 (Version 1.1, 2006),25and 5246 (Version 1.2,
2008).26Similar to IKE, TLS aims to create a secure connection between two peers using
origin authentication and session key establishment. Similar to IKE, the numerous SSL andTLS revisions have sought to improve security and usability based on feedback fromwidespread use. Nevertheless, fully RFC-compliant IKE or TLS products are sophisticatedsoftware packages that are prone to implementation error and misconﬁguration. Once again,the best bet is to use the latest and greatest revision of the protocoldin this case, TLS v1.2.However, similar to IKE, the various ﬂavors of TLS are not fully backward compatible toearlier versions. In particular, a TLS implementation that supports only version 1.2 will beunable to connect with an implementation that does not support version 1.2. Like IPsec, TLScryptographic processing can be ofﬂoaded to security engines if present.
5.2.6.1 OpenSSLOpenSSL is a popular open source SSL/TLS and cryptographic algorithm toolkit. Ports of
OpenSSL exist for most modern embedded operating systems, including Linux and INTEGRITY .310 Chapter 5

--- Page 321 ---
At the time of this writing, TLS 1.2 is not yet supported in OpenSSL. Thus, if an organization’s
embedded device must connect with OpenSSL peers, then it may be forced to use TLS 1.1.OpenSSL should support TLS 1.2 soon, perhaps even by the time this book is published.
OpenSSL is a great example of why embedded systems developers should not assume that
products are secure simply because their suppliers state they are or even because the products arededicated speciﬁcally to security functionality. A search of U.S. CERT’s National VulnerabilityDatabase will show more than 100 software vulnerabilities in OpenSSL over the years, includingﬁve published in 2011. About a quarter of the software ﬂaws published to date are classiﬁed assevere. For example, CVE-2007-4995: “off-by-one error in the DTLS implementation inOpenSSL 0.9.8 before 0.9.8f allows remote attackers to execute arbitrary code.”
Embedded systems developers incorporating OpenSSL into products should verify that the
version in use has the latest security patches applied. If a high robustness version of TLS isrequired, contact your embedded software supplier for commercially supported, certiﬁed options.
The OpenSSL toolkit consists of two major components: libssl , the implementation of SSL,
TLS, and DTLS protocols; and libcrypto , a full-featured cryptographic library that can be, and
often is, used independently of the SSL-related protocols. The OpenSSL toolkit builds these
components into a combined library (usually a shared or dynamic link library) as well asa command-line tool for executing useful commands such as creating cryptographic keys,executing benchmarks, and encrypting the contents of a ﬁle.
For embedded systems developers of memory-constrained products, it is important to
understand the memory footprint ramiﬁcations of incorporating network security protocolpackages. In the case of OpenSSL, libssl’s static footprint (code and data only, not includingdynamic memory allocation) is approximately 200 KB. The cryptographic algorithm library,libcrypto, is approximately 1 MB in size. The OpenSSL executable, which incorporates otherstandard library functions, has a footprint of approximately 1.5 MB. These numbers changefrom one version to another as protocol changes are made, algorithms added, and so on. And,of course, numbers vary based on target CPU architecture and compiler used. In addition,because the source code is available, developers can customize the libraries to removeunneeded portions and reduce footprint.
Unfortunately, open standard APIs do not exist for SSL or TLS or practically any of the other
data protection protocols discussed in this chapter. The OpenSSL API is documented on thewww.openssl.org website.
5.2.6.2 GnuTLS
GnuTLS is another open source SSL/TLS library. Unlike OpenSSL’s BSD-style license,
GnuTLS employs the Lesser General Public License (LGPL). GnuTLS supports the lateststandards, including DTLS and TLS 1.2, and includes a cryptographic library.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 311

--- Page 322 ---
We use GnuTLS to illustrate one way that TLS is integrated into typical networking code. The
general ﬂow in GnuTLS for a client to establish a secure socket connection to a compatibleremote TLS server is as follows:
1. Use the standard sockets interface to establish an unprotected connection.2.Create a
protected channel on top of the original unprotected socket using a TLS
handshake.
3. Use the TLS socket API to send and receive packets on the protected channel.
The following IPv4 code fragments show how GnuTLS is used together with the standardsocket APIs to 
create TLS-protected sessions. GnuTLS API calls and types are shown in bold:
int my_tls_connect(struct addrinfo *dest, gnutls_session_t session)
{
int fd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_TCP);
./* some more initialization here */
if (fd < 0)
return -1;
if (connect(fd, dest->ai_addr, dest->ai_addrlen) < 0)
return -1;
/* fd: standard, unprotected socket connection *//* associate the original socket with a TLS session */gnutls_transport_set_ptr (session, ( gnutls_transport_ptr_t )fd);
/* perform the TLS handshake */if ( gnutls_handshake (session) < 0)
return -1;
/* Now session refers to an established TLS session */
return 0;
}
/* The TLS analog to a socket send() */
void my_tls_send(gnutls_session_t s, void *data, uint32_t len)
{
gnutls_record_send (s, data, len);
}
/* The TLS analog to a socket recv() */int my_tls_recv(gnutls_session_t s, void *data, uint32_t maxlen)
{
return gnutls_record_recv (s, data, maxlen);
}
While it is unfortunate that the lack of TLS API standardization ensures that the preceding code
will not work with other TLS implementations, the code does show that the typical sequencesare not complicated. In fact, developers can structure their code to abstract the implementation-dependent calls and types into a single portation module that is easy to swap in and out basedon the selected library.
In practice, this TLS code will also need to include some global and per-session
initialization calls as well as calls to specify authentication methods (X.509 certiﬁcate based,312 Chapter 5

--- Page 323 ---
pre-shared key, etc.) and other conﬁguration parameters. The detailed documentation for
GnuTLS can be found on the public Internet at www.gnutls.org .
5.2.7 Embedded VPN Clients
Virtual private networks (VPNs) provide data conﬁdentiality, integrity, and originauthentication across untrusted networks such as the Internet. We use VPNs to connect ourlaptops using a cafe ´’s open Wi-Fi hotspot to our corporate intranets. VPN technology can be
used to enable embedded systems to be secure managed remotely across heterogeneousnetworks (as long as these systems follow or can tunnel Internet Protocol). Given thisdescription, it should come as no surprise that VPNs are frequently implemented with IKE/
IPsec. A typical IPsec VPN client will incorporate the IKE protocol code while taking
advantage of the IPsec functionality built into the underlying operating system. If anorganization’s underlying operating system does not support IPsec, then it must adopt a VPNtechnology that incorporates both IKE and IPsec.
Key Point
The lack of any standardized API or framework for IKE and IPsec has led to the creation of VPN
client applications to encapsulate some of the tedious conﬁguration, such as identifying a server
IP address and authentication information, associated with these protocols.
A VPN application also gathers together numerous other auxiliary functions associated with
IKE/IPsec, including support for digital certiﬁcate (e.g., X.509) parsing and veriﬁcation, thebehind-the-scenes use of system calls to communicate IKE-created keying material down tothe IPsec stack, and interfaces to additional authentication methods and cryptographichardware such as a smartcard.
Readers should not be fooled into thinking that incorporating a VPN application into an
embedded system will be trivial. Developers should be prepared to read a lot of documentationregarding how to build and conﬁgure VPN software. Unfortunately, the suppliers of VPNclients have themselves made little effort to standardize on the APIs that embedded systemsdevelopers would use to incorporate them. For attended systems, a VPN client application mayinclude a graphical user interface for conﬁguration and session establishment. For unattendedembedded systems, some form of development kit and documentation must be provided.Embedded systems developers should consider creating an independent API for invoking VPNservices, insulating application software from the choice of VPN client package.
5.2.7.1 Openswan and Racoon2Openswan is an example of an IPsec VPN package that can be used in either client or server
modes. Openswan is a popular open source product for Linux operating systems. Originally,Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 313

--- Page 324 ---
Openswan included both the IPsec patches to the Linux kernel as well as the user-mode IKE
daemon, called pluto. As of the Linux 2.6, however, IPsec is incorporated into the standardkernel distribution and well supported, reducing Openswan to the user-space IKE andassociated connection establishment and conﬁguration services. Openswan has been tested forinteroperability with numerous open and proprietary VPN technologies, such as Cisco andWindows. At the time of this writing, Openswan information and software can be found on theInternet at www.openswan.org .
A modern Openswan implementation will require approximately 300 KB of codeand data storage (static footprint), not including the cryptographic algorithms requiredby IKE.
Numerous VPN books have been penned, such as Jon Snader’s VPNs Illustrated:
Tunnels, VPNs, and IPsec.
27A book on Openswan authored by its developers is also
available.28
Most of Openswan is governed by GPLv2. Developers looking for a more friendly licensed
alternative should consider Racoon2, which employs a BSD-style license. Racoon2provides implementations of IKE (v1 and v2) and has been adapted for use with the IPsecstacks of numerous operating systems, including BSD, Linux, and MacOS. At thetime of this writing, Racoon2 information and software can be found on the Internet atwww.racoon2.wide.ad.jp .
5.2.7.2 OpenVPN
OpenVPN is another open source VPN technology. However, unlike Openswan, OpenVPN
uses a variant on SSL/TLS to establish a tunnel and therefore requires a compatibleOpenVPN peer. OpenVPN uses OpenSSL cryptography extensively. Because it consistsentirely of user-space code, OpenVPN is considered easier to port to multiple operatingsystems, which has been done in practice, unlike Openswan, which has been relegated only toLinux systems.
OpenVPN is an example of what is termed an SSL VPN technology, of which numerous
proprietary, commercial products exist. Because they use the SSL/TLS protocol (and many can
support DTLS for UDP trafﬁc, described in the following section), VPNs can be created at theapplication level, resulting in reduced privilege and overhead relative to an IPsec VPN thatopens up an entire network pipe for all applications running on the system. In addition, SSLVPNs can be easier to install and conﬁgure.
Unfortunately, most SSL VPN implementations, including OpenVPN, are not interoperable.
A decision to use a Juniper SSL VPN client likely requires adoption of Juniper SSLVPN concentrator equipment. OpenVPN clients talk only to OpenVPN peers in theback end.314 Chapter 5

--- Page 325 ---
5.2.8 DTLS
Key Point
Datagram TLS (DTLS) is designed to provide the same capabilities as TLS for UDP-based
transport protocols and applications that use them.
DTLS was published in 2006 and is deﬁned in RFC 4347.29It is gaining in popularity due to
the increased use of voice and video streaming protocols that can tolerate dropped packets and
prefer the lower overhead of UDP over TCP. Unfortunately, DTLS, to a large extent, mustreinvent the wheel built by IPsec for handling dropped and out-of-order packets that can occurduring the TLS handshake protocol. Therefore, DTLS adds complications to an alreadycomplex TLS protocol. Nevertheless, as with TLS, DTLS is a good choice when the systemdoes not already incorporate an IPsec stack or when there is a desire to enable ﬁne-grainedapplication-level control of network security.
5.2.9 SSH
Secure Shell (SSH), as the name implies, was originally designed to provide secure remoteaccess to computers by users or other computers. The original applications of SSH replacelegacy protocols such as telnet ,rlogin, and rshthat rely on plaintext transmission without
cryptographic authentication. Essentially, SSH adds public key authentication and data-in-transit protection to a TCP socket session. The result is a more secure way for users andcomputers to create secure interactive sessions with another remote computer. A typicalapplication of SSH in embedded systems is to run an SSH server within the ﬁelded embeddedsystems and enable remote administrators to manage the embedded systems using the SSHprotocol and system-speciﬁc shell commands.
Key Point
The history of SSH demonstrates the difﬁculty of achieving high levels of security in sophisticated
data protection protocols.
SSH was originally developed in 1995 and within 5 years boasted millions of worldwide users. Yet
13 years after SSH’s founding, a vulnerability was discovered in all versions of SSH. Thevulnerability makes it possible for an attacker to recover up to 32 bits of plaintext from an arbitraryblock of ciphertext when CBC mode (see Chapter 4) is used for encryption.
30This vulnerability
exists even in the latest version of SSH, SSH-2. There is no more recent version of the standarddevoid of this vulnerability. The published workaround is to use CTR mode in place of CBC mode.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 315

--- Page 326 ---
Several severe vulnerabilities in previous versions of SSH were found over the years prior to
this CBC ﬂaw. In fact, a bug ﬁx made to address a vulnerability in the SSH-1 version protocolactually introduced a new, serious vulnerability that enables a remote attacker to executearbitrary code within the SSH server, which executes with root privilege on many general-purpose operating systems.
31
Unlike many other network protocols that are concisely deﬁned in one or two RFCs, SSH-2protocol is deﬁned by ﬁve core standards: RFC 4250,
32RFC 4251,33RFC 4252,34RFC 4253,35
and RFC 4254.36
This standards complexity is perhaps indicative of the protocol complexity and its historicalsecurity difﬁculties.
5.2.9.1 Additional Protocols Based on SSHSSH has been used as the basis to create secure versions of other popular communications
applications that involve remote computer access by users and other computers. These includeSSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), conceptually similar to File Transfer Protocol (FTP), andSecure Copy Protocol (SCP), a security-enhanced approach to remote copy protocol (RCP).SFTP is described in an expired draft RFC,
37but no active RFC deﬁnes the protocol. Similarly,
no RFC exists for SCP, leaving interoperability up to vendors (not usually a good idea).
5.2.9.2 OpenSSHPerhaps one explanation for the lack of standardization around these uses of SSH is the
ubiquity of OpenSSH, an open source implementation of SSH that includes both client- andserver-side implementations as well as SFTP and SCP support. Development of OpenSSH isled by the OpenBSD community and enjoys a liberal BSD license. OpenSSH has its own fullycontained cryptographic library and has been ported to a wide range of embedded operatingsystems. Developers should expect an SSH client to require on the order of 300 KB of ROM/ﬂash storage for executable code and data.
5.2.10 Custom Network Security Protocols
Key Point
Due to the complexity and large footprint of both IPsec and TLS, a number of commercial software
suppliers and university researchers have proposed alternative, lighter-weight network securityprotocols; for embedded systems designers more concerned about simplicity and footprint and lessconcerned about interoperability with arbitrary peers, custom protocols may be a viable alternative.
It is critical to have assurance that cryptographic experts have independently analyzed and
validated the custom protocols.316 Chapter 5

--- Page 327 ---
Let’s look at a sample set of simpliﬁcations to SSL based on areas of the protocol that have
been found to be vulnerable. SSL allows for peers to negotiate a cipher suite to ensureinteroperability. This makes sense: if a server supports 3DES and AES for bulk encryption anda client supports only 3DES, then the ciphersuite negotiation enables the peers to deduce thecommon 3DES algorithm so that communication can occur. However, security administratorsdeploying SSL on a server may desire 256-bit AES protection and not realize that a client maynegotiate the server down to a weaker algorithm such as 3DES. Furthermore, man-in-the-middle attacks have successfully forced ciphersuite downgrades between peers. One exampleaffects most shipping versions of OpenSSL and is referred to as CVE-2010-4180 in the NISTNational Vulnerability Database.
38
Other vulnerabilities of SSL affect its renegotiation, a protocol feature that allows a peer torequest a re-establishment (authenticate and create a new shared key) within a previouslyestablished session. This vulnerability, referred to as CVE-2009-3555,
39enables a man-in-the-
middle attacker to inject malicious text during an otherwise valid established session betweentwo unsuspecting peers. Because the attacker is unable to read the session’s encrypted text, thisvulnerability was thought at ﬁrst to be relatively benign. However, researchers soon founda way to use injected text to cajole a web server into disclosing sensitive data. In particular,a successful attack on Twitter was performed: the injected text actually instructed Twitter tomaliciously tweet the username and password information of a tweeting user. The attacker thengrabbed the illicit tweet and could use the pilfered information to assume the identity of theunsuspecting user.
A potential simpliﬁcation to SSL would be to remove the complexity surrounding the
negotiation of cryptographic suites between peers as well as the ability to resume or renegotiatesessions. Imagine that an embedded system’s designers want to be protected with a speciﬁc setof cipher suites, such as 384-bit elliptic curve digital signatures for authentication and keyagreement as well as 256-bit AES-GCM for authenticated encryption of all data in transit. Theclient’s SSL implementation can initiate a session specifying these suites and not permitanything weaker. The client will use a successfully established session encryption key fora client-deﬁned cryptoperiod and then terminate the session permanently at the end of thisperiod. No session resumption or renegotiation is permitted. If a peer needs to change thesecurity association, it simply can close the socket and restart the protocol. While this approachmay not be suitable for SSL VPN concentrators, it may be ﬁne for embedded systems and havethe beneﬁt of simplifying the embedded system’s code, reducing footprint, and avoidingweaknessesd those already discovered and perhaps others yet to be found.
With six versions and actively discovered weaknesses, SSL is a good example of a failure torigorously employ the PHASE principle of complexity minimization. As with manysophisticated pieces of software, even those created to perform security functions, SSL’scollection of authors simply did not have the discipline to sacriﬁce unnecessary features toData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 317

--- Page 328 ---
create a simpler, cleaner, and ultimately more secure design. It is interesting to note that, in
response to the renegotiation vulnerability, the workaround applied to web servers is to disablethe renegotiation feature in the underlying SSL implementation. This workaround has beenwidely deployed, proving that the feature is unnecessary. Nevertheless, readers may ﬁnd ithumorous that the IETF’s ultimate solution to this problem, rather than killing off renegotiationand simplifying the protocol, was to add yet another feature to SSL (RFC 5746) that links therenegotiation handshakes to their original sessions, preventing the man-in-the-middle attack.
40
Let’s consider a neighborhood of homes outﬁtted with smart meters that communicate witha neighborhood area network gateway that is designed and supplied by the same company asthe smart meters. This is exactly the situation in which a custom, streamlined protocol,compliant but not necessarily conformant to the RFCs, may be appropriate. Alternatively,a committee tasked with creating the security standards for the smart grid could adopt thisadjustment to the protocol. TLS is just one example; similar simpliﬁcations and improvementsto the IKE and IPsec protocols could be made.
If an embedded design is tight on footprint or calls for a higher-assurance implementation and
can tolerate a lack of full RFC conformance and interoperability, the developer should consultthe operating system and/or systems software provider to discuss alternatives.
5.2.10.1 Trafﬁc Flow ConﬁdentialityAs mentioned earlier, IPsec ESP Tunnel mode provides improved transmission security by
encapsulating the original IP packet’s addressing information within a new header thattypically corresponds to a gateway fronting a substantial network. Eavesdroppers candetermine the origin and destination networks but not the identity of or the speciﬁc targeting ofpackets to individual nodes behind the gateways.
Another example of transmission security is the elision of trafﬁc ﬂow information. Trafﬁc ﬂow
includes the rate and size of individual packets. Eavesdroppers may be able to gainunauthorized access to information about the nature of communications by observing trafﬁcﬂow.
For example, a compromised, malicious node in a network can transmit sensitive information
to a colluding eavesdropper by employing covert network timing channels. The compromisedmode transmits a numeric value, N, by sending a rapid sequence of N packets preceded andfollowed by a long delay. A speciﬁc numeric value can be selected to signal the start and end ofa new covert message, built from these packet sequences.
Another well-known approach involves the malicious application sending payloads of certain
sizes to convey information. For example, the colluders may interpret payloads of less than 50bytes as binary zero and payloads larger than 50 bytes as binary one. Special pre-arrangedpayload sizes can be used to signal the start and end of a new covert message, built from these318 Chapter 5

--- Page 329 ---
packet sequences. The packet-size attack is demonstrated in Figure 5.11 , where the size of each
packet communicates either a 0 or 1, generating the ASCII message “SECRET.”
In both of these examples, the network security protocol’s encryption of payloads does nothing
to prevent the malicious insider from exposing sensitive information on the network.
Key Point
While the current open standards for network security protocols, such as TLS, DTLS, SSH, and
IPsec, do not provide full trafﬁc ﬂow conﬁdentiality, some embedded software suppliers provideversions of these protocols that are enhanced to provide this feature.
For example, the IPsec implementation can pad all payloads to a constant size, preventing the
aforementioned packet-length attack. The additional padding overhead may be acceptable oreven necessary for some environments. Furthermore, developers of embedded products thatincorporate network security features may gain competitive advantage by offering theircustomers trafﬁc ﬂow conﬁdentiality features.
5.2.11 Application of Cryptography within Network Security Protocols
Of course, network security protocols can be only as secure as their underlying ciphers. It issilly to use TLS to negotiate a weak symmetric key that can be easily broken with a brute-forceattack. The breadth of public key, symmetric key, and hash/MAC algorithms and modes used inembedded systems today is staggering. Chapter 4 provides an overview of all these key areas ofcryptography as well as government guidance for their general application.
5.2.11.1 NSA Suite B Guidance
A number of RFCs have been published that deﬁne the Suite B algorithm requirements for use
with popular network security protocols. RFC 4869 covers Suite B requirements for IKE andIPsec. RFC 5430 covers TLS. A primary focus of these RFCs is to specify acceptablecryptosuites (e.g., AES in Galois Counter Mode with certain key lengths) for Suite Bcompliance when employing these protocols.
Figure 5.11:
A form of covert communication enabled by a lack of trafﬁc ﬂow conﬁdentiality.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 319

--- Page 330 ---
5.2.12 Secure Multimedia Protocols
Multimedia protocols govern the transmission of so-called real-time data, not in the
embedded hard real-time sense, but rather in the sense that communication quality dependson minimized packet loss, low latency, and jitter. Examples include audio (e.g., voice), video,continuous environmental sampling, and certain kinds of remote control and managementapplications.
In some instances NSA has developed its own protocols because of security issues with
existing commercial protocols or for lack of commercial protocols for certain applications.
For secure voice applications (wired and wireless), NSA developed a secure voice protocol,
Secure Communications Interoperability Protocol (SCIP), that speciﬁes secure association
establishment procedures for voice calls using a wide set of voice codecs and for use in bothpoint-to-point and point-to-multipoint applications. SCIP was initially deployed in 2001and is now widely adopted for NSA Type 1-certiﬁed voice equipment and throughoutNATO.
SCIP is not used in commercial products and hence is not useful for developers of embedded
systems (e.g., radios) that are used beyond the sensitive government environment. Therefore,we do not discuss SCIP in any detail here. The use of this non-commercial protocol posesa problem for the NSA’s recent cryptographic interoperability strategy (see Chapter 4) thatstrives to maximize use of commercial standards such as IPsec and published cryptographicalgorithms. Therefore, we can expect the NSA’s stance on secure voice to change rapidly,promoting a conversion from SCIP to open standards-based protocols.
In the commercial world, secure voice has become increasingly important as corporations have
adopted the use of mobile cellular devices for sensitive communications and so-called softphones dphones that use the Internet for voice transmission. The general
family of protocols for transmitting voice over Internet Protocol is called Voice over IP (VoIP).
VoIP encompasses numerous proprietary (e.g., Skype) and open standard protocols,
a comprehensive discussion of which is not practical in this chapter. We cover just a couple ofthe more important ones, especially those that are general enough to include generalizedmultimedia (e.g., audio and video) transmission. Secure multimedia protocols can generally bebroken down into two pieces, a signaling protocol (also called the control portion) that isresponsible for locating the receiver (or receivers in a multicast application) and establishinga connection, and a data transport protocol responsible for moving encrypted multimedia datafrom sender to receiver(s). In some cases, multimedia compression codecs are ensconcedwithin the data plane; these algorithms are beyond the scope of this discussion. Figure 5.12
shows the signaling and data plane paths in a local area network that connects to the outsideworld through a private branch exchange (PBX).320 Chapter 5

--- Page 331 ---
5.2.12.1 Signaling Protocols
Multimedia control plane protocols may be quite sophisticated, as they are responsible for locating
the appropriate receiver(s), negotiating a common media format capability, crossing and tunnelingacross heterogeneous networks and communication media via routers and gateways, mutualendpoint authentication, and session teardown. The H.323 and Session Initiation Protocols (SIP)are the dominant open standard signaling protocols in use today. H.323 is deﬁned by thetelecommunications standardization sector of the United Nations agency for information andcommunication technologies (ITU-T). For detailed information on H.323, readers are encouragedto consult the ITU-T’s speciﬁcations for H.323 and its subsidiary protocols.
41
Unlike H.323, which was designed for traditional circuit-switched networks, SIP wasoriginally designed for IP networks. Numerous comparisons of H.323 and SIP can be found inthe literature.
42Despite a large install base of H.323, SIP seems to be taking over as the
dominant protocol. Like many other Internet Protocol-based standards, SIP is deﬁned by theIETFdin this case, RFC 2543.
43For readers interested in how complex these multimedia
control protocols are, the SIP RFC is about 270 pages long as compared to the latest IPsecRFC, 4301, which is about 100 pages long. SIP is also the control plane protocol of choice foremerging mobile wireless networks, such as LTE, due to the desire to maximize compatibilitywith IETF Internet standards.
Figure 5.12:
Independent signaling and data channel paths are common in secure voice applications.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 321

--- Page 332 ---
Security concerns for signaling protocols include the ability to steal an endpoint’s identity,
denial of service, transmission security (detecting which endpoints are communicating), andnon-repudiation (inability to verify origin). These concerns arise from the fact that SIP is anunprotected protocol, susceptible to replay and other man-in-the-middle attacks. Theseweaknesses are addressed by an IETF standard dedicated to the security of SIP: RFC3329.
44
Numerous other ad hoc mechanisms can be used to establish multimedia sessions betweenendpoints on an IP network. Fundamentally, once an endpoint can determine the IP address ofits destination, then a data channel can be established using IP transport mechanisms. Forexample, a mobile phone application can use SMS messaging to interrogate a named user overthe cellular network and obtain the active IP address of the user’s mobile phone. The details ofSIP signaling used to establish the SMS interaction are hidden from the mobile phoneapplication. Furthermore, the mobile phone application can use its own application-levelauthentication over the data channel, not relying on the security of the underlying cellularnetwork.
5.2.12.2 Multimedia Transport Protocols
Once a session is established, multimedia data must be sent efﬁciently and conﬁdentially over
the link. As mentioned previously, data channel endpoint authentication is often desirable.Thus, one might think a standard TLS session would ﬁt the bill. However, TLS runs over TCP,which introduces too much latency for multimedia applications. Because multimediacommunication is generally tolerant of the occasional dropped packet, the low-latency UDPtransport is often employed. Therefore, one might think that DTLS would ﬁt the bill. In fact,DTLS may be just ﬁne for high-bandwidth network links (e.g., video chat within a LAN).However, multimedia streams often run across the Internet and/or wide-area wireless networks(e.g., LTE) where bandwidth is limited and choppy. For this reason, an optimized securetransport protocol is indicated.
45
5.2.12.2.1 SRTP
The Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) is a popular framework protocol for multimediatransport. The RTP framework is described in RFC 3550.
46Application of the framework to
speciﬁc information formats is covered in companion standards. For example, the applicationof audio and video conferences is standardized in RFC 3551.
47This standard covers numerous
audio and video encodings. One of the key differences between RTP and a simple UDP streamis the inclusion of quality-of-service information that is conveyed to endpoints for potentialcorrective action and sequencing information that is used to reconstruct the media stream fromout-of-order packets. In addition, RTP handles multiple concurrent multimedia sourcesmulticasting at varying rates (multipoint-to-multipoint), making the applications developer’sjob much easier.322 Chapter 5

--- Page 333 ---
Key Point
While proprietary, non-standard multimedia transport protocols exist, the majority of
commercial and open source multimedia (especially voice and video) transport over IP protocols
use RTP and its adjunct security protocol, Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP).
SRTP is deﬁned in RFC 3711.48At a high level, SRTP provides the same security services as
the more generic secure transport protocols for IP (IPsec, TLS, DTLS): data origin
authentication, integrity (including replay protection), and conﬁdentiality. Unlike IPsec, which
is agnostic to the choice of underlying encryption cipher, SRTP enforces the use of ciphermodes friendly to multimedia. In particular, SRTP speciﬁes variations of the counter andoutput feedback modes that, as discussed in Chapter 4, do not propagate errors when a packetis dropped. SRTP uses HMAC-SHA-1 for message authentication. Another critical differenceof SRTP over tunneled IPsec is that SRTP retains the original RTP headers, enabling quality-of-service data to survive within the encrypted channel (obviously at the expense of sometrafﬁc conﬁdentiality).
SRTP, like IPsec but unlike TLS, does not cover key establishment between communicating
parties. Popular key exchange protocols used with SRTP include Multimedia Internet Keying(MIKEY) deﬁned in RFC 3830,
49Session Description Protocol Security Descriptions for
Media Streams (SDES) deﬁned in RFC 4568, and ZRTP deﬁned in RFC 6189.50SDES
piggybacks on SIP messages and is hence unsuitable to applications using other signalingmechanisms. Similarly, MIKEY is intended for signaling path key exchange. In contrast, ZRTPperforms key exchange within the media channel and therefore is agnostic to signalingmechanism. There is some debate as to whether it is more sensible to perform key exchangewithin the signaling channel (which is already establishing connections) or to keep itdecoupled. Given the variety of device types, formats, and networks that characterize themodern digital world, a decoupled approach, assuming sufﬁcient efﬁciency, is desirable.Developers of secure multimedia applications can provide end-to-end authentication andencryption without worrying about how communicating parties are connected. Interestedreaders, however, are encouraged to review counterpoints for speciﬁc applications, such asVoIP.
51Readers are also encouraged to examine RFC 5479,52an information document that
discusses the various options of key management both within the signaling plane and within themedia plane.
5.2.12.2.2 DTLS-SRTP
DTLS-SRTP, deﬁned in RFC 5764,53presents a hybrid in which signaling path
communicating parties are bound to certiﬁcates used in the media path key establishment.The reason this is important is that a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) may not be practicalbetween communicating parties in all instances. With DTLS-SRTP, the communicatingData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 323

--- Page 334 ---
parties use self-signed certiﬁcates bound to their signaling identities. If Alice dials Bob and
gets connected by the signaling plane, then Alice trusts the signaling plane and now wants toensure that her voice data is encrypted with a key that only Bob (as deﬁned by his phonenumber) also shares.
The signaling plane forwards the certiﬁcates, and actual key agreement is performed by DTLS
over the media channel. One of the desirable traits of DTLS-SRTP is that DTLS is a generickey exchange protocol used throughout the Internet for datagram-oriented data (likemultimedia). SRTP is the de facto secure transport protocol for multimedia. Therefore, DTLS-SRTP represents arguably the best-understood, standardized combination of end-to-end secureInternet protocols for multimedia.
Perhaps surprisingly, current NSA Suite B guidance points to DTLS-SRTP. What makes this
surprising is the protocol’s inherent trust of the signaling domain. Imagine an intelligenceanalyst speaking classiﬁed information into a smartphone, communicating across bridgedpublic cellular networks to another part of the world. Clearly, that would be a bad idea, sincea compromised foreign phone company could direct the classiﬁed voice data to a maliciouslistener. The use of DTLS-SRTP in a classiﬁed domain, therefore, assumes that voice calls areconnected over a private network, isolated from the public switched telephone network (PSTN)and the global Internet, or that the signaling plane enforces authentication deemed trustworthyby NSA. If signaling cannot be trusted, then a proprietary protocol or ZRTP would beindicated. Note that ZRTP has an option for using full PKI for authentication. Alternatively, theU.S. government is considering the use of mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs) thatprovide private signaling domains implemented as virtual cellular networks overlaid onestablished physical cellular networks.
At the time of this writing, Suite B guidance for the use of DTLS-SRTP is in draft RFC state.
54
The draft standard overrides SRTP’s bulk data cipher with the Suite B preferred AES-GCM
suite and requires elliptic curve cryptography, ECDSA and ECDH, for the authentication andkey agreement algorithms. Embedded systems developers creating products with multimediaapplications and targeting U.S. government use (autonomous vehicles is a salient example)would be well advised to consider the use of DTLS-SRTP.
5.2.13 Broadcast Security
So far, the network security protocols discussed in this chapter all rely on a duplex connection:transmitter(s) and receiver(s) both must send information to complete the protocol. Practicallyall IP-based protocols assume an underlying data link layer that inherently allows any endpointto both send and receive data. Most middleware protocols, such as client/server CORBA, alsoassume a duplex communications medium. Broadcast, on the other hand, is an example ofsimplex communication: all information is sent in one direction, from sender to receivers. An
example of a system that requires broadcast communications security is a digital satellite324 Chapter 5

--- Page 335 ---
system that transmits protected multimedia content to widely distributed set-top box receivers
(seeFigure 5.13 ). The set-top box receivers are unable to transmit data directly back to the
satellite.
To complicate matters further, broadcast systems are often characterized by a large and
dynamic set of receivers and a dynamic set of information that needs to be transmitted,operate on physical networks that are tightly bandwidth constrained, and have limitedphysically protected storage (e.g., tamper-resistant smartcard) within each receiver.Like many other embedded systems, broadcast receivers are often unattended byauthorized security administrators and cannot tolerate sophisticated key managementschemes.
The conﬂicting requirements for dynamic content and receivers and simple key management
present a signiﬁcant challenge to embedded systems developers. Thus, we describe andcompare several approaches for the use of information encryption keys in broadcastenvironments. We focus on two main types of encryption keys: key encryption keys (KEKs)and transmission encryption keys (TEKs). TEKs are the symmetric data encryption keys usedfor information content protection. For example, the information in transmission may beprotected using an error-tolerant bulk encryption algorithm such as AES-CFB (described inChapter 4). KEKs are used to encrypt (wrap) TEKs such that only a receiver that possesses theKEK can decrypt and use a TEK.
Figure 5.13:
Sample embedded systems-based broadcast network.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 325

--- Page 336 ---
5.2.13.1 Single TEK
The single-TEK approach uses a single shared content key among all receivers, all of which are
pre-provisioned with the TEK at the factory. Receivers need a trivial amount of local storage,enough to hold the single TEK. The broadcaster sends encrypted information protected bythe TEK.
Protecting the keys within the receiver is of paramount importance since an attacker who
can successfully rec over the key from any receiver’s me mory or clone an entire receiver can
then gain unauthori zed access. For high- value information, a hi gh-quality cryptographic
element able to withstand sophisticated physical attack would be used for key storage.Since such devices are expensive, they are often very limited in memory size, making thesingle-TEK approach tempting. Adding to this temptation, single-TEK is efﬁcient withrespect to communication overhead since no additional keyi ng material is broadcast to the
receivers.
Of course, single-TEK security is extremely weak since a single compromised receiver will
allow all content that has ever been sent with the TEK to be compromised. The single-TEKapproach violates the important cryptographic key management principles described inChapter 4 and should be avoided. The single-TEK approach is shown in Figure 5.14 .
5.2.13.2 Group TEKs
Finite groups of TEKs can be used for collections of content to reduce the information
compromise when a particular TEK is exposed while avoiding the need to update TEKs withinthe receivers. For example, a digital satellite system for pay TV could use separate TEKs forspeciﬁc programs and/or speciﬁc times of day and/or groups of receivers. The broadcastedcontent includes metadata that enables the receiver to identify the TEK needed to decrypta particular stream.
Figure 5.14:
Single, shared TEK.326 Chapter 5

--- Page 337 ---
This scenario implies that receivers must locally store lots of TEKs that still may be infeasible
given hardware constraints. Even if we assume a signiﬁcant number of usable TEKs, the group-TEK approach still suffers from cryptoperiod weakness: a compromised TEK will expose allinformation ever transmitted using the TEK.
The multiple TEK approach, shown in Figure 5.15 , is communications bandwidth efﬁcient.
5.2.13.3 Single KEKThe single-KEK approach uses a single KEK shared among all receivers to protect the TEKs.
This also addresses the cryptoperiod problem since the broadcast can use unique TEKs for eachtransmission. A compromised TEK will expose only the limited content protected by that TEK.
Receivers need a trivial amount of local storage, enough to hold the single KEK. The
broadcaster sends streams of information that include the wrapped TEKs and the informationcorresponding to those TEKs. The requirement of broadcasting the TEK impactscommunications bandwidth. However, this trade-off is usually negligible djust a handful more
bytes of data.
Given these favorable properties, the single-KEK approach seems like a reasonable
compromise. In fact, DirecTV satellite television system has employed such a scheme. SeeFigure 5.16 .
We hope that attentive readers are still horriﬁed by this “compromise.”
Key Point
The sharing of a single symmetric key for all protected broadcast content violates the most basic
application of the least privilege principle and would be considered anathema to any cryptographer.
Figure 5.15:
Multiple TEKs.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 327

--- Page 338 ---
Nevertheless, the existence of this approach in practice demonstrates how embedded systems
developers will sometimes sacriﬁce security in exchange for development and maintenancesimplicity, even for high-value information.
Hackers were able to break into DirecTV receivers to steal the KEK and then the content. It is
believed that the compromise went undetected for years, causing immense value loss. Whenﬁnally detected, the hacking led to a war between DirecTV and the thieves, with DirecTVattempting various patches, followed closely by increasingly sophisticated attempts to bypass.Eventually, DirecTV installed a patch that would accurately detect an illegal receiver and thenpermanently disable that receiver remotely.
However, one has to wonder how much pain would have been prevented if DirecTV had
adopted a more secure approach from the beginning.
5.2.13.4 KEK Per ReceiverClearly, we would like to have a unique KEK per receiver, used to wrap the per-transmission
TEKs (see Figure 5.17 ). We would have excellent local receiver storage efﬁciency and avoid
the problems associated with shared key compromises. A compromised receiver’s KEK couldbe trivially revoked without affecting the other receivers.
Unfortunately, this approach kills communications bandwidth efﬁciency. The broadcast must
include N copies of the wrapped TEK, one for each of the N receivers in the network. Fora network of one million receivers and 128-bit TEKs, 16 MB of key material would bebroadcast for each transmission. This corresponds to about 13 seconds on a 10-Mbit mediaconnection, clearly unacceptable for many applications.
The obvious compromise is to group receivers such that KEKs can be shared, but in a limited
manner (e.g., by geography or some other means) to reduce the bandwidth overhead withoutgiving up entirely on least privilege.
Figure 5.16:
Single KEK with broadcast TEKs.328 Chapter 5

--- Page 339 ---
Much academic research has been applied to the problem of creating efﬁcient hierarchical
groups of receivers and keys to strike the best possible balance between communicationsbandwidth and security. Enterprising readers who do not mind dense academic prose may beinterested in the ACM paper “Key Management for Encrypted Broadcast.”
55
5.2.13.5 Single KEK with Group TEKs
In the preceding methods, we assumed a limited amount of physically protected, cryptographic
element-based key storage. This constraint is not likely to change in the near future. However,what is also unlikely in modern embedded systems is a similarly tight constraint in other formsof non-volatile memory.
Key Point
A powerful technique for dramatically increasing the amount of protected key storage is to use
the physically protected plaintext keys to wrap other keys stored in plentiful storage media, suchas NAND ﬂash or hard disk.
Therefore, we propose an approach (see Figure 5.18 ) that is bandwidth-efﬁcient, is simple to
manage, and takes advantage of signiﬁcant local storage space. Each receiver has a unique KEK;
however, the KEK is not used to broadcast TEKs. Instead, a large set of TEKs is wrapped by theKEK and provisioned to the receiver out of band by the service provider. The encrypted TEKs
Figure 5.17:
KEK per receiver with per-KEK encrypted broadcasted TEKs.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 329

--- Page 340 ---
are stored in regular non-volatile memory. The same TEKs are provisioned to the broadcaster
and used to encrypt selected groups of content streams, as described in the previous “GroupTEKs” section. The lack of broadcasted TEKs provides maximum bandwidth efﬁciency.
The lifetime of the locally stored TEKs depends on the amount of storage, the number of
individually keyed data streams that must be simulcasted, and the value of the protectedinformation. The service provider must re-provision the receivers at a rate commensurate withthe exhaustion of the TEKs’ cryptoperiods.
While the rate of out-of-band provisioning may vary across different types of embedded
systems, some form of access for this purpose is often possible. In Chapter 4, we discussed thescenario of a submarine that is deployed for a long time and receives mission orders viabroadcast. The submarine must store enough TEKs locally until it eventually returns to port.A car must periodically be taken in for service. A smart meter can be occasionally serviced bya utility technician or may be connected to the home network for out-of-band communication.If no out-of-band provisioning were feasible, then grouped KEKs and broadcasted TEKswould be necessary.
5.3 Data-at-Rest Protocols
In 2010, the CBS network in the United States aired a program demonstrating how discardedofﬁce copiers are gold mines for private information, trivially harvested from disk drives within
Figure 5.18:
Individualized KEKs with group TEKs provisioned out of band and wrapped on disk.330 Chapter 5

--- Page 341 ---
the machines. From copiers randomly selected from a used copier warehouse, investigators
recovered lists of wanted sex offenders, drug raid targets, architectural design plans, personalidentiﬁcation information (name, address, Social Security number), and medicalrecordsdincluding blood test results and a cancer diagnosis.
56
When asked whether this situation could be prevented, a copier company said that customers couldpurchase a $500 option that will erase copied images from the hard drive after use. Give the guythat wrote those couple lines of code a bonus! Another obvious solution is the topic of this section:data-at-rest encryption. Many embedded systems can beneﬁt from data-at-rest protection.
Key Point
Essentially, any device that locally stores sensitive information is at risk of attack such that
someone obtaining physical access to the embedded system can access the internal storage and
read off the sensitive information.
Embedded systems may incorporate hard disk drives, ﬂash memory, or attached USB thumb
drives for this purpose. In the ofﬁce equipment market, let’s consider the following typesof embedded systems that can and do store sensitive information during their normal operation:
Fax machinesScannersPhone message recording
systems
Digital signageVideo conferencing systemsSecurity camera systemsSmartphones and tabletsPrinters
Many embedded systems developers are simply unaware of the risks associated with storeddata. And
the customers of these products are in the same boat. Embedded systems
developers can lead the way by ﬁrst providing data-at-rest encryption features to improve theoverall secu rity of these products and then ensuring that end users take advantage of these
facilities.
Key Point
Compliance regulations in certain industries require that sensitive stored data be protected with
appropriate data protection protocols that include encryption.
In the medical sector, the Health Insurance Portability and Accounting Act (HIPAA) requires
the protection of patient data stored within medical devices. In the ﬁnancial sector, the PaymentData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 331

--- Page 342 ---
Card Industry data security standard (PCI DSS) requires the protection of credit card
information within ﬁnancial processing systems. Data-at-rest protection within smartphonesand tablets is a requirement for security-conscious enterprises and governments that allowthose handhelds to be used for the processing of sensitive information.
5.3.1 Choosing the Storage Layer for Security
Earlier in this chapter we discussed the multiple layers in the communications stack fromwhich developers may choose to apply data-in-transit protection protocols. As shown inFigure 5.19 , an analogous choice exists for the protection of data at rest.
With full disk encryption (FDE), the entire media used for storage is encrypted. This has the
advantage of ensuring that hidden ﬁles, such as operating system temporary ﬁles and swap space,are not exposed. When FDE is handled within the media peripheral itself, this is referred to asaself-encrypting drive (SED). Self-encrypting drives are common in the laptop market. The
advantage of SEDs for the embedded systems developer is that little or no new software must bewritten to take advantage of the data protection facilities. Encryption is performed with specializedhardware within the storage device, ofﬂoading the main embedded applications processor.
Key Point
If self-encrypting storage media is feasible, it is an excellent choice due to ease of use, excellent
performance, and the ability to hide the storage encryption key from the main applications
processor and memory.
Figure 5.19:
Data-at-rest protection choices by layer.332 Chapter 5

--- Page 343 ---
Unfortunately, many embedded systems will simply be unable to use the available standalone
SDE products due to form factor limitations.
Encryption can be performed at the next level up, the device management layer, typically
a block-oriented driver. Protection at this level would cover the entire managed mediadevice (FDE). The performance implications of this approach vary. If the embeddedplatform contains a symmetric encryption accelerator, the n the overh ead is likely to be
reasonable. A pure software cryptographic implementation may cause a dramatic loss inperformance. Whether this overhead is acceptable depends on the rate of storage mediaaccess requests and other system-level performance requirements. Embedded systemsdevelopers can architect the encryption facilities such that the device driver calls out togeneric media block encryption routines, ensuring that software is easier to maintainacross different generations of the embedded product that may use different types ofstorage.
Key Point
Some embedded operating systems provide board support packages (BSPs) that include
encryption-aware storage device drivers.
The next level candidate for data-at-rest protection is the ﬁle system.
Key Point
The major advantage of implementing storage protection at the ﬁle system layer is to provide ﬁnergranularity over the choice of information that requires storage conﬁdentiality.
Having this granularity is especially important if encryption is performed in software with
minimal or no hardware acceleration. Depending on the ﬁle system implementation,developers may be provided options for encryption at the volume level or at the individual ﬁlelevel.
Finally, applications can add their own data protection, either using underlying ﬁle
system encryption features or a custom implementation. For example, an audit loggingapplication can encrypt its audit records prior to calling the standard ﬁle system outputfunctions.
In the cases of volume-, ﬁle-, or application-level data protection, developers can employ
separate keys for these groups of data rather than a single key for the entire system. This isa sensible application of least privilege principles.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 333

--- Page 344 ---
Key Point
As with network security layer selection, there is no single right answer for selecting the layer for
data-at-rest protection; in some cases, developers may want to use more than one layer for
defense-in-depth.
Developers resorting to custom, application-level approaches will also need to take on key
management responsibility, whereas users of encrypting ﬁle systems or SEDs can takeadvantage of the key management framework provided by the product supplier.
5.3.2 Symmetric Encryption Algorithm Selection
Data-at-rest presents some unique challenges for encryption algorithms relative to networksecurity protocols. While developers may be able to rely on the operating system or ﬁle systemvendor to handle the encryption details, it is critical to understand whether the supplier hasselected a strong technical approach. Furthermore, readers who are implementing a do-it-yourself data protection system need to understand these details.
For readers who may have skipped Chapter 4, now is a good time to go back and become
familiar with that part of the chapter covering symmetric encryption algorithms and modes. Forthe purposes of this discussion, we omit integrity protection, as most data-at-rest applicationsconcern themselves only with conﬁdentiality.
For data-at-rest protection, we generally want an encryption algorithm that can be
performed without adding additional storage space: a plaintext media block is encrypted inplace, generating a ciphertext block of the same size. The most basic encryption mode,ECB, would provide this memory conservation but is not suitable for data-at-restencryption since any two same plaintext blocks will encrypt to the same ciphertext, makingit easy for an attacker to ﬁnd patterns in the data and potentially derive information. Wemust consider other modes, most of which require an initialization vector (IV). However, toavoid space expansion, the data protection system must include a means for implicitlyderiving this IV.
Implicit IV derivation poses a surprisingly difﬁcult challenge for common encryption modes.
From our study of these modes in Chapter 4, we know that the common modes requireuniqueness: the same IV must never be reused for a particular key. For example, with CTRmode, a predictable counter can be used, but the same number can never be repeated for a givenkey. For CBC mode, a unique and unpredictable number must be used. Network securityprotocols have the freedom to generate the IV and send it along as part of the transmitted data;for AES-CBC, each transmission can generate a new random number for the IV and transmitthis IV to the receiver. But for data-at-rest, we have no room to store the IV for subsequentdecryption.334 Chapter 5

--- Page 345 ---
The obvious source for an implicit IV would be the sector number and offset for a particular
data block. Using this combination provides every disk block with a relatively unique inputvalue. However, as data blocks are overwritten during the course of normal operation, the samesector and offset are reused for the same key. This implies a serious weakness in theapplicability of common encryption modes for data-at-rest protection. Numerous otherweaknesses of common modes, especially CBC, have been identiﬁed when applied to data-at-rest protection protocols. An excellent paper discussing these weaknesses is that by ClemensFruhwirth, “New Methods in Hard Disk Encryption.”
57
5.3.2.1 Tweakable Ciphers
The good news is that cryptographers have worked diligently to address this encryption mode
challenge. Liskov, Rivest, and Wagner introduced the concept of a tweakable block cipher in
2002.58The basic idea of a tweakable cipher is to apply the IV concept to the single-block
cipher itself rather than to a chaining mode built on top of the block cipher. As shown inFigure 5.20 , the block cipher converts a plaintext block to a ciphertext block, using both the
traditional key as well as the tweak as inputs.
Key Point
The practical application of tweakable ciphers for the data-at-rest protection problem is the
property that the cipher’s security does not precl ude reuse of the initialization vector; thus,
media sector number and block offset within the sector provide a perfect ﬁt for tweakselection.
Figure 5.20:
Tweakable block cipher overview.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 335

--- Page 346 ---
5.3.2.2 XTS-AES
In 2007, IEEE’s Security in Storage Working Group (SISWG) published standard P1619.59
Key Point
The IEEE P1619 standard deﬁnes the XTS-AES cipher mode as a result of a thorough study of
numerous potential tweak-based algorithms for use in data-at-rest protection applications.
This choice is further bolstered by NIST in its Special Publication 800-38E,60which approves
the XTS-AES cipher mode and references its deﬁnition in IEEE P1619-2007. Finally, FIPS
140-2 has been amended to include XTS-AES as an approved cipher for validation.
As an example of commercial adoption, note that the latest Mac OSX release at the time of this
writing, codename Lion, is the ﬁrst Mac operating system to provide a native full diskencryption feature; this product uses XTS-AES.
The tweak algorithm found in XTS-AES is based on and almost identical to the one originally
created by noted cryptographer Phillip Rogaway, called XEX.
61In addition to strong security,
XEX and therefore XTS-AES are also designed for efﬁciency when applied to storage of manysequential data blocks (as is common with ﬁle storage).
The XTS-AES block cipher is depicted in Figure 5.21 .
An odd aspect of this cipher is the requirement for twice the keying material; for 128-bit
security, 256-bits of key must be used. The ﬁrst half of the key is used to process the plaintext;the second half is used to encrypt a 128-bit representation of the sector number, which acts asthe primary tweak, as shown in Figure 5.21 . The result of this encryption is then fed to
a function that performs a Galois ﬁeld multiplication (implemented as a sequence of shifts andXORs) of the encryption result with a Galois constant derived from the secondary tweak, thenumeric index of the data block within the sector. Consult the IEEE P1619 document fora detailed deﬁnition of the Galois multiplication operation.
The result of this Galois multiplication is used twice. First, it is added (XORed) to the plaintext
block, which is then encrypted with the ﬁrst key half. Second, the Galois result is added(XORed) again to the plaintext block encryption result to create the ﬁnal ciphertext block.
Decryption is similar; however, while the AES-ECB decryption algorithm is used to process
the ciphertext, the tweak cipher remains the same, using the AES-ECB encryptionalgorithm.
In practice, data is stored to media in sectors. Therefore, the preceding block encryption
algorithm must be executed in a loop across the entire sector. Note that while XTS-AEShandles partial blocks, that part of the algorithm is often unnecessary. For example, the336 Chapter 5

--- Page 347 ---
common sector size of 512 bytes will result in 32 block encryptions, and most media
management layers will access a full sector at a time. For such a system, given a function,
xts_encrypt, which takes the sector number and size in bytes, plaintext block, and encryptionkey as input, the following simple code sequence handles the sector encryption:
sector_encrypt(uint8_t *sector, uint32_t sector_num, uint32_t
sector_size, uint8_t key[])
{
uint32_t i;
assert((sector_size % AES_BLOCK_SIZE) == 0); /* 512 % 16 */for (i = 0; i < sector_size/AES_BLOCK_SIZE; i++) /* 32x */
xts_encrypt(sector+i*AES_BLOCK_SIZE, key, sector_num, i);
}
It is also easy to see from this code sequence that XTS-AES is parallelizable. If the embedded
system contains an AES hardware accelerator (especially one that has direct support for XTSmode), the preceding implementation should be modiﬁed to take advantage of theaccelerator’s ability to process multiple AES blocks at once. Furthermore, if the media allowsfor sector size conﬁgurability, developers may want to vary the sector size to see ifbetter throughput (potentially at the expense of slightly reduced space efﬁciency) can beachieved.
Figure 5.21:
The XTS-AES data-at-rest encryption cipher.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 337

--- Page 348 ---
Embedded systems developers selecting data-at-rest protection products are advised to avoid
legacy approaches that use weaker modes (numerous CBC-based implementations have beencommercialized) and instead employ the NIST- and FIPS-approved standards. Perhapssurprisingly, NSA’s current Suite B guidance at the time of this writing is reticent with respectto data-at-rest protocols and modes such as XTS-AES. Yet the NSA has expressed a strongdesire for commercial products to employ Suite B-compliant cryptography and points to FIPS140-2 validation as the entry-level requirement for commercial solutions. Thus, Suite B makesan indirect case for XTS-AES.
5.3.3 Managing the Storage Encryption Key
The primary purpose of data-at-rest protection is to ensure that information residing on lost orstolen media cannot be accessed by unauthorized parties who must be assumed to havecomplete physical access to the media.
Key Point
The symmetric storage encryption key must never be stored in the clear on the media.
However, it is often necessary to store an encrypted copy of the symmetric key on the media (orperhaps an attached Trusted Platform Module, if available). The key is unwrapped for activeuse while the system is executing in an authorized manner. For personal computers such aslaptops and smartphones, unwrapping is triggered by successful authentication of the user(e.g., using a password, smartcard, biometric, etc., or multiple factors).
5.3.3.1 Generating the Storage Encryption Key
A typical method of storage encryption key establishment, for example, is to convert user
credentials into a key using a key derivation function (KDF). A popular KDF used toconvert passwords is the password-based key derivation function, version 2 (PBKDF2).PBKDF2 is deﬁned in the RSA Laboratories speciﬁcation PKCS #5;
62it is duplicated in
RFC 2898.63PBKDF2 applies a hash function to the password concatenated with a salt
(random bitstring). To make password cracking more difﬁcult, the standard recommendsthat the hash output be rehashed multiple times. The recommended minimum hash iterationcount is 1,000, although the number is expect ed to increase over time. Ap ple’s iOS 4.0
uses 10,000 iterations. In September 2010, RIM BlackBerry’s encrypted backup servicewas determined to be vulnerable due to faulty application of PBKDF2: instead offollowing the standard, the BlackBerry software used an iteration count of one. TheBlackBerry vulnerability is documented in the National Vulnerability Database as CVE-2010-3741.
64338 Chapter 5

--- Page 349 ---
When the password is used to directly generate the storage encryption key, a change in
password changes the encryption key and therefore forces re-encryption of the entireprotected media. To avoid this problem, a permanent, unique encryption key is createdwhen the media is initially provisioned, and then this key is wrapped (encrypted) with thepassword-derived key. With this two-level keying scheme, a periodic password change(good security practice) only requires re-wrapping of the encryption key.
The user authentication approach may be sufﬁcient for limited types of attended embedded
systems that can tolerate user intervention whenever the protected volumes must be unlocked.Imagine an enterprise printer that has FDE (sadly, most of them do not, but that is why we’rehere!). With such a high-availability system in a workplace environment, it may be acceptableto require a system administrator to log on to the printer to unlock the protected volumes in thecase of a system reboot (planned or unplanned).
Nevertheless, this approach is not sufﬁcient for large classes of unattended embedded systems.
If the embedded system encounters a fault and automatically reboots, the encrypted volumesmust be able to get back online without manual credential input.
5.3.3.2 Remote Key Provisioning
We can consider two classes of unattended embedded systems: those that have a remote
management network interface and those that do not. For the latter, the embedded systemsimply lacks any mechanism for dynamic interaction that can unlock an encryption key. In thiscase, if information value demands data-at-rest protection, then the designer is advised toincorporate a cryptographic co-processor that provides physical tamper-resistant key storageand internal execution of the data encryption algorithm. The device driver sends in plaintext tothis encryptor and receives ciphertext for storage on disk and similarly requests decryption ofdisk blocks as needed.
For network-enabled embedded systems, a remote management server holds a database of the
provisioned data encryption keys. A server connection is initiated by the embedded systemwhenever a data encryption key must be unlocked (e.g., at boot time). The embedded systemand server mutually authenticate (using some choice of the network security protocolsdescribed earlier in this chapter), and then the server provides a copy of the embedded system’sprovisioned data encryption key over the secured channel. This approach obviously depends onavailable network connectivity to enable the data protection services. The system designermust adopt a policy to handle the case in which the network is down when an unlock operationis required. The policy may disable certain sensitive data storage operations, allow for non-protected storage, or may force the device into a non-operational state.
5.3.3.3 Key Escrow
When we forget a website password, there’s always a convenient “forgot your password?” link
we can click to reset it.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 339

--- Page 350 ---
Key Point
When implementing a data-at-rest protection system, developers must consider key escrow to
guard against the possibility that the authentication information used to unlock the storage
encryption key will be lost.
Furthermore, there are situations in which the system owner may need to extract the data
from storage, such as after a system failure. Holding a copy of the data encryption key in anoffsite secure location is advisable in most system designs to prevent loss of data when thedata encryption key is no longer accessible. If the embedded system lacks a networkmanagement interface, then the internally stored key must be exportable onto media foroffsite escrow storage (e.g., in a secure vault). If the system supports network managementand the remote key provisioning described in the previous section, then developers simplyneed to ensure that remotely provisioned keys are retained on a secure server or copied toprotected ofﬂine media.
This description begins to touch on the general subject of key life-cycle management. Many
embedded systems developers adding in security functions, such as data-at-rest protection, forthe ﬁrst time may be ill equipped to handle the problem of managing keys across a large
deployment. Furthermore, for an embedded system manufacturer, customers may expect that
a key life-cycle management system be provided as part of its offering. For example,a developer of smart meters can sell not only smart meters, but also a back-end keymanagement system for creating, distributing, auditing, and escrowing keys used for data-at-rest protection within the smart meters. While a comprehensive discussion of enterprise keylife-cycle management is beyond the scope of this book, many embedded software suppliersthat provide network security and data-at-rest protection solutions also offer a key life-cyclemanagement system. Readers are encouraged to consult vendors to see what options areavailable.
5.3.4 Advanced Threats to Data Encryption Solutions
The authentication software that runs to unlock encrypted media must itself be trustworthy andtamper protected. For example, the embedded operating system may incorporate theauthentication function directly. The embedded operating system image (and any precedingboot loaders) is not encrypted; only the rest of the media, which contains sensitive ﬁles, isprotected. If the embedded operating system is not trusted (e.g., at risk of containing malwareor vulnerabilities that would permit the loading of malware), then the authentication processcould be subverted. For example, a key logger could record the user’s password, enablingrecovery of the storage encryption key and all the encrypted data.340 Chapter 5

--- Page 351 ---
If we assume the embedded operating system is trustworthy, then we still must ensure that
anything executing prior to launch of the operating system is trusted. This is another goodexample of the need for secure boot (discussed in Chapter 2).
In some cases, the designer may want the embedded operating system to also be encrypted. When
FDE is in use and a sophisticated operating system (e.g., Linux) resides on the encrypted disk, pre-
boot authentication may be employed: a small portion of the encrypted disk contains a mini-
operating system that is booted for the sole purpose of performing the authentication and unlockingof the media prior to booting the full operating system. If the embedded operating system isa secure microkernel (Chapter 2), then a separate pre-boot authentication module is not required.
Attacks against pre-boot authenticators have been successfully perpetrated. For example, the
system is booted to a malicious operating system (e.g., alternative booting from an externalUSB drive) that tampers with the pre-boot code to steal the authentication credentials as theyare input.
65Secure boot can prevent this attack as well; the signature of the modiﬁed
authenticator will fail to match the known-good version, aborting the boot process.
Another example of advanced threat is the so-called cold-boot attack . Unless the embedded
system is using a self-encrypting hard drive where the keys are stored within the media and
never exposed to the main processor, disk encryption requires that the storage encryption keybe kept in memory (in the clear) while the system is operational, invoking the encryption anddecryption algorithm to access data. When the system is turned off, RAM is unavailable, andthe only copy of the encryption key is itself encrypted. Or is it? In some systems, RAM is notimmediately cleared. An attacker boots the system using a malicious operating system thatgrabs the plaintext key in RAM. This attack has been performed successfully.
66
Data-at-rest protection within an embedded system equipped with secure boot and a trustedoperating system impervious to remote attack can still be defeated by removing the protectedmedia and booting it on a different computer that lacks this secure environment. Binding thestorage encryption key to its intended embedded system platform can prevent this attack. In thiscase, the permanent storage encryption key is derived (in whole or in combination with usercredentials) from a platform-speciﬁc key, such as a fused one-time programmable key or TPMkey (if applicable). Even if the user’s credentials are stolen, the storage encryption key cannot bederived outside the targeted embedded platform. The downside of this extra level of defense isthat a hardware failure that prevents access to the platform credential will render the datapermanently inaccessible (unless the derived storage encryption key itself is securely escrowed).
Embedded systems developers looking to incorporate network security and/or data-at-rest
protection into their next designs are faced with a plethora of design choices and constraints.This chapter has sought to provide designers with an overview of the key issues that need to beconsidered. At the software architecture level, key network security protocol choices includeIPsec and TLS; while the latest revisions solve important security problems, designers mustData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 341

--- Page 352 ---
also consider requirements for interoperability with communication peers that speak older
versions. From a hardware and systems perspective, designers need to consider the hardwaresecurity capabilities, including full protocol ofﬂoad as well as cryptographic algorithmacceleration and secure key storage, of embedded processors. Footprint and latency constraintsas well as certiﬁcation requirements may further inﬂuence the road taken. Specialconsiderations for data-at-rest protection include the use of government-approved symmetricencryption algorithms designed speciﬁcally for such applications and proper management ofthe long-term keys typically used for this purpose.
5.4 Key Points
1. Identity anonymity (part of transmission security) is often a desired goal of data-in-
motion protocols.
2. Multipoint applications force key management and exchange challenges to be decoupled
from the bulk data protocols: the developer must ﬁnd a way to distribute a shared keyacross the group and then multicast packets protected with that key.
3. Multi-layered data protection may be used as a defense-in-depth strategy and can also
occur when upper layers are unaware or distrustful of lower-layer protection capabilities.
4. Choice of network protection layer can have signiﬁcant impact on functionality,
performance, interoperability, and maintainability.
5. It is the efﬁcient protocol handling and encryption in hardware and lack of spare
applications processing and storage resources that forces certain embedded systems torely on data link layer protection rather than more ﬂexible upper-layer choices.
6. The biggest drawback of link layer data protection is that, by deﬁnition, the scheme can
work only on a network consisting of devices using the homogeneous data link media.
7. The IEEE 802.1X standard deﬁnes requirements for the secure joining of endpoints into
Ethernet networks.
8. The mapping of Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) requirements to wireless
Ethernet LANs as well as other wireless Ethernet security requirements is deﬁned inIEEE 802.11i-2004.
9. The security functions speciﬁed in IEEE 802.11i protect against local eavesdroppers
and hackers trying to gain access to a network via the access point but do not provideend-to-end protection.
10. Contrary to popular belief, Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) is not a deﬁnitive security
standard, but rather a certiﬁcation quasi-standard intended to provide industry withconﬁdence that Wi-Fi-certiﬁed devices meet the requirements of IEEE 802.11i.
11. Embedded systems developers acquiring wireless Ethernet software for incorporation
into devices should select stacks that not only claim conformance to WPA2, but have alsohave been successfully deployed in Wi-Fi-certiﬁed products.342 Chapter 5

--- Page 353 ---
12. Known as MACsec, the IEEE 802.1AE standard is the analog of IEEE 802.11i for wired
Ethernet (IEEE 802.3) networks.
13. Developers looking for the most portable, ﬂexible, and extensible data-in-motion security
should look above the data link layer toward the network (IP) and higher layers.
14. IPsec operates at layer three (the Internet Protocol layer), making it invisible to both
higher-level protocols (e.g., TCP) as well as applications.
15. SSL and its modern variant, Transport Layer Security (TLS), operate on layer four, the
transport layer; it is common for applications to use TLS by invoking a sockets-like API.
16. A major advantage of TLS is that it can take advantage of TCP’s guaranteed in-order
packet delivery to simplify the protocol relative to IPsec, which must handle dropped
messages and out-of-order delivery.
17. The use of TLS enables applications to select when they need the security (and are willing
to pay the associated overhead).
18. An important advantage of IPsec is that applications can derive security beneﬁts without
requiring any application-level decisions or code modiﬁcations (such as adjusting to usea modiﬁed-sockets API).
19. An example of a good choice for bump-in-the-stack (BITS) IPsec is a virtualized envi-
ronment where guest operating systems already have integrated network stacks, yet thereis a desire to implement network security outside the virtual machine where ﬂaws in guestoperating systems could derail intended security.
20. ESP Tunnel mode is the IPsec combination of choice when maximum security and
conﬁdentiality are required.
21. In general, an IKE/IPsec or TLS session key’s lifetime (called the cryptoperiod) should be
limited and a new session key re-established to limit the damage should a session key becompromised.
22. Generally speaking, if sufﬁcient interoperability can be assured, IKEv2 is strongly
recommended over IKEv1.
23. In the best case of a non-routable (local) packet, 6LoWPAN can reduce the UDP/IPv6
header size to just 4 bytes (relative to the usual 48); the best case for routable packetsyields a header size of 11 bytes.
24. The lack of any standardized API or framework for IKE and IPsec has led to the creation of
VPN client applications to encapsulate some of the tedious conﬁguration, such as identi-fying a server IP address and authentication information, associated with these protocols.
25. Datagram TLS (DTLS) is designed to provide the same capabilities as TLS for UDP-
based transport protocols and applications that use them.
26. The history of SSH demonstrates the difﬁculty of achieving high levels of security in
sophisticated data protection protocols.
27. Due to the complexity and large footprint of both IPsec and TLS, a number of commercial
software suppliers and university researchers have proposed alternative, lighter-weightData Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 343

--- Page 354 ---
network security protocols; for embedded systems designers more concerned about
simplicity and footprint and less concerned about interoperability with arbitrary peers,custom protocols may be a viable alternative.
28. While the current open standards for network security protocols, such as TLS, DTLS,
SSH, and IPsec, do not provide full trafﬁc ﬂow conﬁdentiality, some embedded softwaresuppliers provide versions of these protocols that are enhanced to provide this feature.
29. While proprietary, non-standard multimedia transport protocols exist, the majority of
commercial and open source multimedia (especially voice and video) transport over IPprotocols use RTP and its adjunct security protocol, Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol(SRTP).
30. The sharing of a single symmetric key for all protected broadcast content violates the
most basic application of the least privilege principle and would be considered anathemato any cryptographer.
31. A powerful technique for dramatically increasing the amount of protected key storage is
to use the physically protected plaintext keys to wrap other keys stored in plentiful storagemedia, such as NAND ﬂash or hard disk.
32. Essentially, any device that locally stores sensitive information is at risk of attack where
someone obtaining physical access to the embedded system can access the internalstorage and read off the sensitive information.
33. Compliance regulations in certain industries require that sensitive stored data be
protected with appropriate data protection protocols that include encryption.
34. If self-encrypting storage media is feasible, it is an excellent choice due to ease of use,
excellent performance, and the ability to hide the storage encryption key from the mainapplications processor and memory.
35. Some embedded operating systems provide board support packages (BSPs) that include
encryption-aware storage device drivers.
36. The major advantage of implementing storage protection at the ﬁle system layer is to
provide ﬁner granularity over the choice of information that requires storageconﬁdentiality.
37. As with network security layer selection, there is no single right answer for selecting the
layer for data-at-rest protection; in some cases, developers may want to use more than onelayer for defense-in-depth.
38. The practical application of tweakable ciphers for the data-at-rest protection problem is
the property that the cipher’s security does not preclude reuse of the initialization vector;thus, media sector number and block offset within the sector provide a perfect ﬁt fortweak selection.
39. The IEEE P1619 standard deﬁnes the XTS-AES cipher mode as a result of a thorough
study of numerous potential tweak-based algorithms for use in data-at-rest protectionapplications.344 Chapter 5

--- Page 355 ---
40. The symmetric storage encryption key must never be stored in the clear on the media.
41. When implementing a data-at-rest protection system, developers must consider key
escrow to guard against the possibility that the authentication information used to unlockthe storage encryption key will be lost.
5.5 Bibliography and Notes
1. Boyd C, Mathuria A. Protocols for Authentication and Key Establishment . Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag;
2003.
2. Multicast Extensions to the Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol. Internet Engineering Task Force,
Request for Comments: 5374; November 2008.
3. Multicast Security (MSEC) Group Key Management Architecture. Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 4046; April 2005.
4. IEEE Standard 802.1x-2001. IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks dPort-Based Network
Access Control . IEEE Computer Security; June 2001.
5.Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 3748;
June 2004.
6.Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key Management Framework . Internet Engineering Task Force,
Request for Comments: 4017; March 2005.
7.Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Method Requirements for Wireless LANs . Internet Engineering Task
Force, Request for Comments: 5247; August 2008.
8. Geier J. Implementing 802.1x Security Solutions for Wired and Wireless Networks . New York: Wiley; 2008.
9. IEEE Standard 802.11i. Supplement to Standard for Telecommunications Information Exchange Between
SystemsdLAN/MAN Speciﬁc Requirements dPart 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcation for Enhanced Security; July 2004.
10. The State of Wi-Fi Security. Wi-Fi Certiﬁed WPA2 Delivers Advanced Security to Homes, Enterprises and
Mobile Devices . Wi-Fi Alliance; September 2009.
11. IEEE Standard 802.1AE-2006. IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks dMedia Access
Control (MAC) Security . IEEE Computer Security; August 2006.
12. Lawson S. Facebook Sees Need for Terabit Ethernet. Computerworld; February 3, 2010.
13.Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
4301; December 2005.
14.IP Authentication Header . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4302; December 2005.
15.IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4303;
December 2005.
16. NIST Special Publication 800-57. Recommendation for Key Management dPart 1: General (Revised) ; March
2007.
17.The Internet Key Exchange . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 2409; November 1998.
18.Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4306;
December 2005.
19.Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2) . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
5996; September 2010.
20.Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 4944; September 2007.
21. ISA-100.11a. Wireless Systems for Industrial Automation: Process Control and Related Applications . The
International Society for Automation; 2009.
22.Zigbee Smart Energy 2.0 Technical Requirements Document, draft version 0.7 . Zigbee Alliance; 2011.
23. Shelby Z, Bormann C. 6LoWPAN, The Wireless Embedded Internet. New York: Wiley; 2009.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 345

--- Page 356 ---
24.The TLS Protocol Version 1.0 . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 2246; January 1999.
25.The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1 . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 4346; April 2006.
26.The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2 . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 5246; August 2008.
27. Snader JC. VPNs Illustrated: Tunnels, VPNs, and IPsec. Addison-Wesley Professional; November 2005.
28. Bantoft K, Wouters P. Openswan: Building and Integrating Virtual Private Networks: Learn from the
Developers of Openswan How to Build Industry Standard, Military Grade VPNs and Connect Them with
Windows, MacOSX, and Other VPN Vendors . Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing; February 2006.
29.Datagram Transport Layer Security . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4347; April
2006.
30. SSH CBC Vulnerability, US-CERT Vulnerability Note VU#958563.31. SSH CRC32 Attack Detection Code Contains Remote Integer Overﬂow, US-CERT Vulnerability Note
VU#945216.
32.The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Assigned Numbers . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
4250; January 2006.
33.The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4251;
January 2006.
34.The Secure Shell (SSH) Authentication Protocol. Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
4252; January 2006.
35.The Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer Protocol . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
4253; January 2006.
36.The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection Protocol . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 4253;
January 2006.
37. SSH File Transfer Protocol. Internet-Draft from the Secure Shell Working Group.
38. National Institute of Standards and Technology National Vulnerability Database. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/
vuln/detail?vulnId ¼CVE-2010-4180.
39. National Institute of Standards and Technology National Vulnerability Database. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/
vuln/detail?vulnId ¼CVE-2009-3555.
40.Transport Layer Security (TLS) Renegotiation Indication Extension . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 5746; February 2010.
41. Recommendation ITU-T H.323. Packet-Based Multimedia Communications Systems . Telecommunications
Standardization Section of ITU; December 2009.
42. Papageorgiou P. A Comparison of H.323 vs. SIP ; June 4, 2001.
43.SIP: Session Initiation Protocol . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 2543; June 2002.
44.Security Mechanism Agreement for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) . Internet Engineering Task Force,
Request for Comments: 3329; January 2003.
45. Schulzrinne H. Issues in Designing a Transport Protocol for Audio and Video Conferences and Other
Multiparticipant Real-Time Applications . expired Internet Draft; October 1993.
46.RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 3550; July 2003.
47.RTP Proﬁle for Audio and Video Conferences with Minimal Control. Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 3551; July 2003.
48.The Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP) . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments:
3711; March 2004.
49.MIKEY: Multimedia Internet KEYing, Internet Engineering Task Force . Request for Comments: 3830; August
2004.
50.ZRTP: Media Path Key Agreement for Unicast Secure RTP . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for
Comments: 6189; April 2011.346 Chapter 5

--- Page 357 ---
51. Orrblad J. Alternatives to MIKEY/SRTP to Secure VoIP .ftp://ftp.it.kth.se/Reports/DEGREE-
PROJECTREPORTS/ 050330-Joachim-Orrblad.pdf ; March 2005.
52.Requirements and Analysis of Media Key Management Protocols . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 5479; April 2009.
53.Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Extension to Establish Keys for the Secure Real-time Transport
Protocol (SRTP). Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments: 5764; May 2010.
54.Suite B Proﬁle for Datagram Transport Layer Security/Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (DTLS-SRTP) .
Internet Engineering Task Force, Draft RFC; April 8, 2011.
55. Wool A. Key Management for Encrypted Broadcast. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security
(TISSEC) May 2000; 3(2).
56. Keteyian A. Digital Photocopiers Loaded With Secrets. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/04/19/
eveningnews/main6412439.shtml?tag=currentVideoInfo;videoMetaInfo; April 20, 2010.
57. Fruhwirth C. New Methods in Hard Disk Encryption; Institute for Computer Languages Theory and Logic
Group. Vienna University of Technology ; July 18, 2005.
58. Liskov M, Rivest R, Wagner D. Tweakable Block Ciphers . LNCS, Crypto: Santa Barbara, CA; 2002.
59. Security in Storage Working Group of the IEEE Computer Society Committee. IEEE P1619. Standard for
Cryptographic Protection of Data on Block-Oriented Storage Devices ; 2007.
60. NIST Special Publication 800-38E. Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: The XTS-AES
Mode for Conﬁdentiality on Storage Devices ; January 2010.
61. Rogaway P. Efﬁcient Instantiations of Tweakable Blockciphers and Reﬁnements to Modes OCB and PMAC,
http://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/papers/offsets.pdf ; September 24, 2004.
62. RSA Laboratories. PKCS #5 v2.0: Password-Based Cryptography Standard; March 25, 1999.
63.PKCS #5: Password-Based Cryptography Speciﬁcation Version 2.0 . Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments: 2898; September 2000.
64. National Institute of Standards and Technology National Vulnerability Database. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/
vuln/detail?vulnId ¼CVE-2010-3741 .
65. Turpe S, et al. Attacking the BitLocker Boot Process . Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Trusted Computing. TRUST; 2009. Oxford, UK, April 6e 8, 2009; LNCS 5471, Springer, 2009. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-642-00587-9_12.
66. Halderman AJ, Schoen SD, Heninger N, Clarkson W, Paul W, Candrino JA, Feldman AJ, Appelbaum J,
Felten EW. Lest We Remember: Cold Boot Attacks on Encryption Keys . Proceedings of the 17th USENIX
Security Symposium; August 2008. 45e 60.Data Protection Protocols for Embedded Systems 347

--- Page 358 ---
CHAPTER 6
Emerging Applications
Chapter Outline
6.1 Embedded Network Transactions 350
6.1.1 Anatomy of a Network Transaction 351
6.1.2 State of Insecurity 351
6.1.3 Network-based Transaction Threats 352
6.1.3.1 Man-in-the-Middle and/or Eavesdropping 352
6.1.3.2 Phishing and Other Social Engineering Attacks 3536.1.3.3 Malware Attacks 3536.1.3.4 Web Application Attacks 3546.1.3.5 Pharming Attacks 3546.1.3.6 Combinations of Attacks 355
6.1.4 Modern Attempts to Improve Network Transaction Security 355
6.1.4.1 Anti-malware 3566.1.4.2 Secure Browsers 3576.1.4.3 Two-Factor Authentication 3586.1.4.4 Network Access Control 3596.1.4.5 Secondary Device Verification 3596.1.4.6 Zone Trusted Information Channel 3606.1.4.7 Virtualized Web Client 3616.1.4.8 Summary: Modern Approaches to Transaction Security 361
6.1.5 Trustworthy Embedded Transaction Architecture 362
6.1.5.1 Communications Proxy 3626.1.5.2 Transaction Verifier 3636.1.5.3 Cryptosystem and PKI Policy Enforcement 365
6.2 Automotive Security 366
6.2.1 Vehicular Security Threats and Mitigations 366
6.2.1.1 Local-Physical 3666.2.1.2 Remote 3686.2.1.3 Internal-Electronic 368
6.3 Secure Android 369
6.3.1 Android Security Retrospective 3696.3.2 Android Device Rooting 3716.3.3 Mobile Phone Data Protection: A Case Study of Defense-in-Depth 3726.3.4 Android Sandboxing Approaches 373
6.3.4.1 Separate Hardware 3736.3.4.2 Multi-Boot 373
Embedded Systems Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386886-2.00006-0
Copyright /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 349

--- Page 359 ---
6.3.4.3 Webtop 374
6.3.4.4 Mobile Device Management Encrypted Containers 3756.3.4.5 Remoting 376
6.3.4.6 Type-2 Hypervisor 376
6.3.4.7 Sandboxes Built on Sand 3776.3.4.8 Type-1 Hypervisor 3776.3.4.9 Physical Security 379
6.4 Next-Generation Software-Defined Radio 380
6.4.1 Red-Black Separation 3806.4.2 Software-Defined Radio Architecture 3816.4.3 Enter Linux 3826.4.4 Multi-Domain Radio 383
6.5 Key Points 385
6.6 Bibliography and Notes 386
Welcome to the ﬁnal chapter of the book and one that is perhaps the most fun for the authors
to write and hopefully equally enjoyable for you to read. While this book includes numerouscase studies, this chapter provides a small number of more detailed case studies of the issues,concerns, and guidance regarding the creation of secure embedded systems. In particular, wefocus on some modern topics that may soon present unique challenges for your nextembedded project: embedded network transactions, automotive security, and how to securelyincorporate the popular Android and Linux operating systems into mobile and embeddedsystems.
6.1 Embedded Network Transactions
Key Point
Much of the world’s commerce and critical infrastructure control depends on the security of
network transactions.
The ability to provide end-to-end transaction security, encompassing both client and server,
therefore is critical to enterprises, governments, and consumers. Increasingly, embeddedsystems act as the clients (and sometimes the server) in such transactions. Yet today’s securityposture for embedded network transactions is hopelessly inadequate. Critical infrastructure issaddled with vulnerabilities in both operating systems and applications, in both clientendpoints and in servers. We employ ﬁlters, scanners, and Patch Tuesdays, but there are alwaysnew vulnerabilities that leave our critical resources exposed. And as we have becomeincreasingly dependent on network transactions, the determination and sophistication ofhackers has risen in tandem.350 Chapter 6

--- Page 360 ---
Key Point
For as little as $25,000, a sophisticated hacker will break into most any network, even the most
strenuously protected enterprise data centers.
Hackers may bypass server security controls, or more often, subvert a comparatively weak
client endpoint from which to access the server’s crown jewels. Increasingly, those clientendpoints are embedded systems.
While there are many security products and research projects that attempt to improve network
transaction security, there has never been a solution that is both highly assured (i.e., certiﬁed toprovide users with a very high conﬁdence that the system will protect high-value informationagainst sophisticated attackers) and deployable (cost effective and easy to use). This sectionexplains the primary modern security threats facing network transactions and surveys some of thelatest attempts (some weak, some promising) to address the problem. In particular, we identifysecurity approaches that are scalable across all client-computing platforms performingcommercial transactions over the Internet, including cell phones and deeply embedded devices.
6.1.1 Anatomy of a Network Transaction
In a network transaction, a client makes a request to a remote server. The client may be makinga payment (on behalf of a cell phone user), modifying the state of a remote resource, orrequesting a wide variety of other services. The server satisﬁes the request by transferringfunds, modifying account state, and so on, and often sends back a response to the client,completing the transaction.
Key Point
Transaction security is deﬁned by the ability of both client and server to have trust in the
authenticity, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of the messages that are sent and received by bothparties throughout the transaction.
Attacks on transactions may target the transaction data deither in situ, within a browser, or
during transmission dor the endpoint computers and resources to which they are connected.
6.1.2 State of Insecurity
The most common way for a hacker to gain access to critical information in servers is to hijack
the client endpoint. Client identities can be stolen through a wide variety of techniques, someof which we discuss later. The hacker uses commandeered credentials and/or web sessions toperform illicit transactions and to gain unauthorized access to servers. While servers areEmerging Applications 351

--- Page 361 ---
usually protected by expensive security appliances such as ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection
systems, intrusion protection systems, and uniﬁed threat management devices, embeddedsystems are generally much more weakly protected and are often situated beyond the server’ssecurity zone, providing a softer attack proﬁle for hackers.
As reported by analyst ﬁrm IDC,
Transmission vehicles for malicious codes (malware) have progressed over the past decade
from ﬂoppy disk, to email, to most recently, networks themselves. This is especially threat-
ening because malware writers have discovered that clients attached to high-speed wireless
and wired networks are powerful means to spread infections. Clients have become thesource of distributed network attacks on servers and more importantly, applications.
1
The pernicious effects of these attacks on transactions have been well publicized. We discuss justa handful of recent events that demonstrate the increasing level of sophistication seen in these attacks.
According to a Businessweek report, top NASA ofﬁcials were socially engineered via
fraudulent e-mail, resulting in the compromise of computers in the agency’s Washington
headquarters in 2006. One of the key ﬁndings of the subsequent investigation, as reported bythe NASA Inspector General, was that “the scope, sophistication, timing, and hostilecharacteristics of some of the intrusions indicate they are coordinated or centrally managed.”
2
During the 2008 U.S. presidential campaign, CNN reported a sophisticated endpoint computermalware intrusion aimed at compromising presidential policy information. Agents from theFBI and Secret Service reported to the Obama campaign headquarters that “you havea problem way bigger than what you understand .you have been compromised, and a serious
amount of ﬁles have been loaded off your system.”
3
InformationWeek reported that the well-publicized 2007 TJX breach that resulted in the theft of
45 million customer records originated, at least in part, from in-store kiosks that were used byhackers to gain access into the corporate LAN.
4
Also in 2008, Wired.com reported how teen queen Miley Cyrus’s e-mail (residing in the
Google cloud), along with some private photos, was stolen when a hacker tricked a MySpaceworker into turning over credentials enabling administrator access to MySpace’s servers.
5
This is, of course, but a smattering of the reported attacks on transaction-based computing.However, the daily deluge of such stories provides testament to the state of insecurity in whichwe transact business, control infrastructure, and socialize on the Internet. In the followingsection, we survey the major threats facing today’s network endpoints.
6.1.3 Network-based Transaction Threats
6.1.3.1 Man-in-the-Middle and/or Eavesdropping
Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks are highly desirable by attackers because they do not
necessarily require a successful client endpoint intrusion such as downloaded malware. Rather,352 Chapter 6

--- Page 362 ---
the attacker intercepts client messages and injects messages back to the client (and in some
cases, also back to the user’s intended server) to redirect the client to a false server or otherwiseimpersonate a valid connection for nefarious purposes.
Key Point
Man-in-the-middle attacks are possible not only on unencrypted links, but also with encrypted
links, such as an SSL-protected HTTP connection, by exploiting weaknesses in the cryptographicinfrastructure or underlying operating systems.
One example of the MITM threat can be found in so-called “evil twin” Wi-Fi access points in
which the attacker impersonates a public, unencrypted Internet link to obtain access toa mobile device, potentially without the user even being aware of the illicit connection.
6MITM
attacks can be used to steal private information directly from the user’s computer (which canthen be used to launch additional attacks) as well as for eavesdropping.
6.1.3.2 Phishing and Other Social Engineering AttacksOne of the most common criticisms against new technological solutions to security problems is
that they are unable to counter the human factor. While it is true that human error can renderimpotent technological security controls, as we discuss later, common socially inducedsecurity problems can indeed be countered by technology.
Phishing attacks are attempts made by malicious websites or e-mails to fool users into
providing sensitive information. In general, social engineering refers to the manipulation ofpeople to cause them to perform actions or divulge information.
Another well-known social engineering attack baits users into installing infected media dfor
example, a USB ﬂash drive that has been dropped on the ground in a corporate parking lot. The
infected USB ﬂash drive is believed to be one of the primary inﬁltration vectors of Stuxnet,discussed in Chapter 1.
Key Point
In general, social engineering attacks are increasingly prevalent and effective, due in part to the
growing sophistication of hackers who are willing to mine the Internet for personal data that canbe used to launch attacks and the increasing use of social networking sites like Facebook thatdraw more personal data into the public domain and make that data more readily accessible.
6.1.3.3 Malware Attacks
Data-stealing malware on an endpoint device can log keystrokes or scrape screen contents to
obtain transaction information that can be used to corrupt future transactions or provideEmerging Applications 353

--- Page 363 ---
a means to attack servers. Malware can disable anti-malware software, launch other forms of
attacks using the hijacked computer’s networking capabilities, alter what the user sees on thescreen, or perform a practically limitless range of subversions intended to steal information orcause users to perform activities that would result in the stealing of information.
6.1.3.4 Web Application AttacksVulnerabilities in server-side web applications may violate the security of transactions. For
example, a cross-side scripting (XSS) vulnerability can enable a remote attacker to hijack a webtransaction by stealing authentication credentials or billing information when a user browsesa vulnerable website. Another common attack involves the exploitation of SQL injectionvulnerabilities in a database to maliciously alter a website that interacts with the database.
6.1.3.5 Pharming AttacksPharming attacks redirect clients to a malicious server. For example, in Domain Name System
(DNS) attacks, redirection is accomplished by modifying the server’s IP address, within theclient’s applicable DNS server.
Key Point
Similar to man-in-the-middle attacks, DNS-based pharming attacks are particularly dangerous
because neither the client nor the server must necessarily be subverted for the attack to succeed.
DNS cache poisoning is one example of a DNS attack in which attackers inject fraudulent
addressing information into a DNS server, tricking it into directing clients to maliciouswebsites. Improved versions of DNS can thwart poisoning attempts but are not alwaysdeployed.
Digital certiﬁcates are intended to protect the user from pharming attacks. Digital certiﬁcates
are the currency of the Internet’s Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), which enables clientendpoints to authenticate and communicate securely with servers by relying on a trustedcertiﬁcation authority (CA). Fraudulent websites should be unable to present a valid certiﬁcateaccepted by the user’s browser. However, users and embedded applications do not always payattention to browser warnings for invalid certiﬁcates, and there are weaknesses in Internet PKIthat may enable attackers to obtain fraudulent certiﬁcates that appear to be signed by thecertiﬁcation authority and hence are accepted by browsers. One study demonstrated preciselythis form of attack, taking advantage of a weakness in the MD5 algorithm that is sometimesused for certiﬁcate digital signatures.
7
The ultimate DNS attack involves subverting the Internet’s trusted certiﬁcation authorities anddomain name registrars dfor example, Network Solutions. Such an attack can cause all354 Chapter 6

--- Page 364 ---
Internet communications to a server to be redirected. That is precisely what happened to
CheckFree, one of the world’s largest online bill payment companies. According to reports, thecompany’s credentials, required to modify its Internet identity via the Network Solutionswebsite, were stolen. Experts believe the credentials were stolen using a phishing attack onCheckFree’s employees. Forty-two million customers access CheckFree’s bill payment site.The company’s Internet address was redirected for several hours. CheckFree warned more thanﬁve million customers of the breach.
8
The CheckFree attack demonstrates the fragility of network transaction security: embeddedsystems developers and service providers who work assiduously to stay up to date with thelatest security patches, anti-malware technologies, and social engineering behavior awarenessare still totally exposed.
6.1.3.6 Combinations of AttacksAn obvious combination of attacks involves the use of phishing to install malware. For
example, a phishing web link within e-mail could cause the user’s browser to connect toa website that has been impregnated with a zero-day ﬂash vulnerability that causes malware tobe surreptitiously downloaded to the user’s computer.
An attack on Citibank’s Citibusiness service used a combination of phishing and MITM to
defeat Citibank’s two-factor authentication scheme. The phishing site asked for the clientapplication’s credentials but then acted as an MITM to forward these credentials to the validCitibusiness site. Thus, someone attempting to test the site for authenticity would ﬁnd that thesite responded correctly to valid versus invalid logins.
9
Another common example entails the use of a web application ﬂaw, such as a cross-site scriptingor SQL injection vulnerability, to launch a phishing attack within a compromised web page.
As alluded to earlier, the CheckFree debacle was most likely caused by the combination of
a phishing attack to obtain credentials followed by the DNS subversion.
6.1.4 Modern Attempts to Improve Network Transaction Security
If there is one thing readers can deduce from the breadth and frequency of vulnerabilities andattack vectors that aim to compromise network transactions, it is the fact that developers andservice providers have been ﬁghting a losing battle trying to stay ahead of the black hats. Theresimply are too many avenues for attack. Current endpoint operating systems, middleware, andapplications were simply never designed for a high level of assurance. This software is alsotremendously complex and getting more complex all the time. As we discussed in Chapter 1,complexity leads to ﬂaws that can be exploited. The combination of complexity and lack ofa high-assurance development process can be thought of as the double whammy of insecuresoftware.Emerging Applications 355

--- Page 365 ---
Key Point
Without a dramatic improvement in secure design and assurance, the dual trend of increasing
software defects and attacker sophistication converges to a total loss of conﬁdence in shared
networks such as the Internet as a medium for commerce or other critical network-based
computing.
The Internet itself was not designed to provide private, secure transactions; rather, it was
designed for the precise opposite: collaboration and sharing of information.
Let’s look at the current state of the art with respect to mitigating network transaction security
threats.
6.1.4.1 Anti-malwareMany transaction endpoint systems run some form of anti-malware software. Examples
include anti-virus, anti-spam, anti-phishing, and ﬁrewalls. Anti-malware is built into operatingsystems, browsers, e-mail clients, and can be purchased as add-ons. This software is valuablebecause it can detect many forms of malware before they can do damage.
Key Point
The problem with anti-malware software is that it is a fundamentally a reactive technology; as
new vulnerabilities and attack methods are discovered, the anti-malware protocols quicklybecome obsolete.
In addition, black-hat-created malware may be operating in the wild far long before being
detected by the community trying to thwart it. A number of independent tests of leading anti-malware products have found all of them unable to cope with a signiﬁcant number of modernmalware specimens.
Secunia, a vulnerability management company, performed one test that found Symantec to be
the best at detecting a suite of malicious ﬁles and web pages. The bad news is that Symantecdetected only 21% (64 of 300) of the malware specimens.
10
Information Security Magazine performed a test of 8,114 malware specimens against seven
different anti-malware vendor products. The best performing product, from Trend Micro, wasunable to detect 7.9%, or approximately 640, specimens.
11
Finally, anti-malware products have themselves been found to be vulnerable. Anti-malwarevendors are forced to change their products rapidly to catch up to the latest specimens. Anti-malware developers do not follow a rigorous high-assurance development process that requires356 Chapter 6

--- Page 366 ---
independent evaluation or certiﬁcation. The U.S. CERT National Vulnerability Database has
posted approximately hundreds of security ﬂaws in Symantec software.12A number of studies
have found anti-malware vulnerabilities to be exploitable.13
Anti-malware is an important component of modern transaction security strategy. However, itis by no means something that can assure transaction security.
6.1.4.2 Secure Browsers
Key Point
An encouraging approach to transaction security involves sandboxing the embedded web client
from the rest of the computing environment; the theory is that a sandboxed browser is less likely
to be infected with malware and therefore more likely to be trusted for secure transactions.
There are a number of approaches to browser sandboxing.
One sandboxing approach uses a separately booted operating system (a version of Linux)
invoked with a special button on the computer. A downside to this is that the user’s regularenvironment is inaccessible while the sandboxed browsing environment is running. A rebootmust occur to move between the two environments. Of course, since the alternate browsingenvironment runs on a general-purpose operating system using general-purpose browsers, it iscertain that hackers would target the alternate environment if it were to achieve widespreadadoption. Users are relying on security through obscurity.
Some vendors of secure portable storage products, such as USB thumb drives, offer a specially
packaged Linux browser environment.
14The browser is launched from and stores sensitive
data to the attached storage device. The disadvantage, of course, is the extra cost andinconvenience of incorporating a separate physical device. In addition to the mobility acrossendpoints that a portable drive provides, this approach has one key advantage over PC-basedsolutions such as the alternate boot: physical security. Some of these portable drives are sealedagainst tampering and will self-destruct their internal cryptographic keys if an attempt tophysically breach the device’s casing is detected.
Another approach to secure browsing is to harden the browser itself. Google’s Chrome browser
is notable for its attempt to provide a more secure browser in which malicious web pages orplug-ins would be less likely to cause harm to unrelated web browser components. However,Google engineers did not use high-assurance development practices to implement Chrome.While Chrome may have some fundamentally good isolation concepts, the lack of commitmentto high-assurance engineering ensures a product that cannot be trusted for high-valuetransactions. It should come as no surprise that in September 2008, just a few months afterChrome’s release, security researchers discovered a buffer overﬂow vulnerability in theEmerging Applications 357

--- Page 367 ---
browser that could allow a hacker to take complete control of the endpoint.15Since this time,
hundreds of vulnerabilities have been posted to the U.S. CERT National Vulnerability
Database.
There have been a few academic attempts to create higher assurance web browsers. A
promising recent effort from Samuel King at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,called the OP web browser, also claims isolation between browser-level components. However,the OP researchers have gone further and employed some formal methods to verify browserbehavior.
16The increased level of assurance can provide OP users with conﬁdence that the
claimed sandboxing capability actually works. Other than the technical obstacles ofcompleting the product and having it independently certiﬁed at a high-assurance level (bothhonorable goals), a major obstacle for something like the OP browser lies in achieving marketacceptance. Developers and users are creatures of comfort; unless OP can be conﬁgured to lookand feel exactly like the most popular browsers (e.g., Internet Explorer, Firefox, Safari) and cankeep up with the ever-changing pace of browser functionality (scripting, plug-ins, look-and-feel), the global impact of such an offering is in question.
Another approach to browser security is to run the browser environment under a concurrently
running virtual machine instead of a separate boot. Assuming adequate performance, thisvirtual browser appliance approach is favorable compared to a secondary boot. However, thevirtual machine software must be trusted to provide the browser sandbox. Typical commercialhypervisors, such as VMware and Xen, were not developed using high-assurance methodology,have had numerous security vulnerabilities reported,
17and therefore cannot be trusted to
withstand attempts made by sophisticated attackers to break the sandbox.
6.1.4.3 Two-Factor Authentication
Two-factor authentication has been the predominant security response from banks and other
security-critical network transaction enterprises. One approach is to require the user to enter anidentiﬁcation number in addition to the usual username and password. The identiﬁcationnumber may be displayed on a specialized device in the key fob form factor. The number isgenerated cryptographically and changes after a short period of time. The bank will supply thisidentiﬁcation device and run a complementary server that generates a matching number. RSA’sSecurID is one popular two-factor authentication solution.
Two-factor authentication is beneﬁcial because it increases the chances that the client and
server can mutually authenticate; hackers in possession of only a valid password are unable toaccess a two-factor protected account. Two-factor authentication protects against somephishing attacks that attempt to steal passwords. However, it does not protect against MITM:the MITM can simply pass on the ﬁrst and second credentials to the real server. Multi-factorauthentication also does not protect against malware that can piggyback on an authenticatedconnection.358 Chapter 6

--- Page 368 ---
Key Point
Due to the ability of malware and other attacks to traverse an authenticated connection, we view
the multi-factor authentication approach, at least by itself, as a weak response to the current
network transaction insecurity climate.
As Bruce Schneier, chief security technology ofﬁcer of telecommunications giant BT and
renowned security expert, stated, “. it won’t work for remote authentication over the
Internet.in the end there will be a negligible drop in the amount of fraud and identity
theft.”18
Schneier’s comments were perhaps prescient; in March 2011, RSA’s SecurID system wascompromised by hackers who allegedly used phishing attacks on RSA employees to installAdobe Flash malware that opened up RSA’s servers to the attackers. The attackers wereallegedly able to steal the SecurID seeds and use them to breach the networks of RSA SecurIDusers, including Lockheed Martin Corporation. One has to wonder, if these reports are true,why a security company like RSAwould leave the keys to the kingdom on servers accessible tothe Internet. It’s not like hacking through ﬁrewalls, UTMs, and DMZs is not a daily occurrenceacross the Internet world.
6.1.4.4 Network Access ControlNetwork Access Control (NAC) attempts to protect a network from access by clients that do
not fulﬁll a conﬁgurable proﬁle. For example, a NAC server may reject or quarantine withina logically separate network any client that does not have the proper operating system patchesapplied and anti-malware software installed. The most basic form of NAC on Ethernetnetworks is the use of 802.1X authentication described in Chapter 5.
NAC is a useful enterprise tool because it enables system administrators to enforce a health
policy on clients connecting to the corporate network. NAC is most useful when networkclients are a somewhat captive and controlled population. NAC is not appropriate for opennetworks (i.e., the Internet) in which the server has no inﬂuence over client hardware andsoftware. But the biggest problem with NAC is the inherent difﬁculty in assessing health.Similar to anti-malware technologies, NAC is reactive. Once a NAC client passes the pre-programmed test of its state, the client’s undetected malware and social-engineering risksremain.
6.1.4.5 Secondary Device VeriﬁcationMobile devices are increasingly taking part in critical network transactions. For example,
near-ﬁeld communication (NFC) contactless terminals built into a phone can be used as thenetwork transaction human interface endpoint. In other cases, the mobile device can beused as a mechanism for two-factor authentication: instead of a separate key fob, the bankEmerging Applications 359

--- Page 369 ---
can send the user the identiﬁcation number, called a mobile transaction number (mTAN)
within an SMS message. In yet other cases, the mobile device is used as an out-of-bandtransaction veriﬁcation: when a user performs a network transaction using a PC, the serviceprovider can send an SMS message to obtain a ﬁnal conﬁrmation from the user beforeproceeding.
Key Point
Out-of-band transaction veriﬁcation is a compelling approach because it enables both client and
server to obtain a higher level of conﬁdence in the authenticity of each other’s identity as well asthe actual information being transacted.
This theory is based on the assumption that attackers will have a harder time creating
a coordinated attack of both the endpoint and out-of-band device.
Criticisms of secondary device veriﬁcation include the requirement to use a separate mobile
device itself, the potential lack of cellular coverage, and the additional cost of SMS messaging.Another problem is the security of the mobile device itself. As we discuss later in the chapter,with vulnerabilities in Google Android iPhone, BlackBerry, and Windows Mobile operatingenvironments, there is little doubt that sophisticated attackers can and will devise methods tosubvert mobile phone operating systems if they were to become widely used for networktransactions. The server, too, is a potential weakness, in that a rogue or otherwise corruptedserver can follow the protocol of sending an out-of-band veriﬁcation that will incorrectly leadthe user to believe that the transaction is safe.
6.1.4.6 Zone Trusted Information ChannelIBM’s Zurich research laboratories created the Zone Trusted Information Channel (ZTIC),
a USB device that provides its own minimal display and network security protocols(SSL/TLS).
19ZTIC provides an authenticated and encrypted channel between client and server
and a means for clients to verify transaction details from the server. However, instead of theaforementioned SMS message, ZTIC uses its own simple display and on-board buttons. ZTIC’sout-of-band veriﬁcation is, in theory, superior to an SMS message due to the more highlyassured information channel upon which the veriﬁcation message is transmitted.
ZTIC has not been certiﬁed to a high-assurance level, and therefore we must assume until
proven otherwise that the software, albeit far simpler than a typical endpoint device, cannot beexpected to withstand determined and sophisticated attackers.
Nonetheless, ZTIC suffers from the same drawback as the mobile phone approach: the user
must learn to use and manage a separate device. Furthermore, it is unknown whether the coststo produce, distribute, and maintain this device would be acceptable to a majority of system360 Chapter 6

--- Page 370 ---
designers. ZTIC plugs into the endpoint via USB and therefore is unsuitable for classes of
embedded devices that lack a USB port.
Another criticism of ZTIC is that, while it holds a private key used for secure communications, the
device itself does not have an interface for user authentication. A lost or stolen device is thereforemore susceptible to malicious use. The device is enabled by user authentication on the PC in whichit is plugged. But insecurity of the PC is the reason for using a ZTIC in the ﬁrst place!
6.1.4.7 Virtualized Web ClientVirtualization enables an improved version of the secure browser concept discussed earlier in
which a dedicated virtual web client appliance runs in one virtual machine (or in a nativeembedded microkernel process when using a microkernel Type 1 hypervisor), while thesystem’s primary environment runs in another virtual machine. Critical to this approach is theuse of high-assurance separation between the sandboxed browser and the primary userenvironment. Figure 6.1 shows a sample implementation in which the embedded system’s
primary environment is Linux, and the virtual web appliance consists of a ported Firefoxbrowser. One can easily envision numerous other applications of this architecture, includingthe use of multiple virtual appliances and user environments. For example, some forms of anti-malware ﬁltering software could be deployed as a virtual appliance, thereby preventing guest-infested malware or guest operating system vulnerabilities from adversely affecting theanti-malware agent.
6.1.4.8 Summary: Modern Approaches to Transaction SecurityAlthough the convenience of the Internet for ﬁnancial and other high-value transactions is
compelling, predominant approaches to security are unable to provide a sufﬁcient level ofassurance against loss. Some enterprise and government organizations have already unpluggedtheir enterprise Internet connections for fear of attack. The U.S. military banned USB thumbdrives for the same reason.
20
Figure 6.1:
Web browser virtual appliance.Emerging Applications 361

--- Page 371 ---
In addition to a lack of high-assurance pedigree and certiﬁcation, most approaches to
transaction security are not sufﬁciently natural and easy to use for the general population.Clearly, a high-assurance approach that still allows the maximum reuse of expected legacyenvironments is needed.
6.1.5 Trustworthy Embedded Transaction Architecture
Let’s take this sandboxing approach a step further. Virtualization can be used to host thesystem’s guest Linux environment while employing two critical security subsystems that run ina separate virtual machine or within a native microkernel process (if applicable). The ﬁrst
subsystem, called the communications server, provides a trustworthy communications
connection between the embedded system and the remote server. The second subsystem, calledthe transaction veriﬁer, provides a trusted veriﬁcation interface for the client (see Figure 6.2 ).
6.1.5.1 Communications Proxy
When the web client instantiates an HTTPS connection to a server, web trafﬁc is ﬁltered and
redirected to a communications proxy that establishes a second cryptographically securedconnection with the server. The key idea here is that this solution creates a protectedconnection, logically out-of-band from the Linux system, but still in-band with respect to theembedded system. Thus, a separate physical device is not needed. Because the second set ofencryption keys, server certiﬁcates, and protocol software runs within native trusted processes,these critical data cannot be stolen or corrupted by the guest operating system, regardless ofmalware inﬁltration. Furthermore, the native security subsystem is able to take advantage ofa Trusted Platform Module (TPM) or equivalent hardware co-processor capabilities, if present,for hardened storage of keys and for platform attestation.
The secure proxy defeats MITM attacks as well as malware attacks that would attempt to
commandeer the cryptographic keys used for secure communications. The secure connection
Figure 6.2:
Secure embedded transaction architecture.362 Chapter 6

--- Page 372 ---
also protects against pharming attacks because the client and server are able to achieve a high
assurance in their mutual authentication protocols. Applying the same approach within theserver endpoint can further augment overall transaction security.
6.1.5.2 Transaction Veriﬁer
When a transaction is about to be executed, the server sends a veriﬁcation request to the client.
This request is also sent on the secure connection and received by the trusted hypervisor/operating system and thus is impervious to security attacks that afﬂict general-purposeoperating software within common client endpoint systems. Note that, depending on thesituation, the server application may need to be adapted to generate this ﬁnal veriﬁcation cycle.However, the existence of the SMS approach proves that service providers are willing to makesuch minor modiﬁcations. In fact, the same format message used in SMS veriﬁcations can beused for the secure connection.
Within an autonomous embedded system, the transaction veriﬁer might execute pre-
programmed rule checking to verify a transaction response and send back its conﬁrmation tothe server. Within client endpoints operated by a human user, veriﬁcation often requires humanconﬁrmation. The veriﬁer can take advantage of the computer’s display to providea veriﬁcation dialog box that can’t be spoofed or overwritten by the guest operating system.The transaction veriﬁer is a client of a trusted graphical display manager hosted by the trustedhypervisor/operating system.
When a human is in the loop, a dedicated LED or audio device could be used to announce an
incoming transaction response, but this may require endpoint hardware modiﬁcations. Anotherapproach is to use a small area of the display screen, called the veriﬁcation sprite , which is reserved
for the transaction veriﬁer. The guest operating system does not have direct access to the physicaldisplay device. Rather, the guest’s accesses to the display are virtualized. The trusted graphicaldisplay manager will update the physical display with the guest’s virtualized graphics content,with the exception of the non-overlapping veriﬁcation sprite whose contents are controlled by thetransaction veriﬁer. When a transaction veriﬁcation request comes in from the server, the spritealters to notify the user that the request is pending. For example, the sprite can change colors.
The user can now click on the sprite (or use a special keyboard sequence) to invoke a secure
conﬁrmation dialog that can use the full power of the screen. The physical act of clicking thesprite or using a reserved keyboard sequence provides the user with a trusted path to theveriﬁcation screen, a sample implementation of which is shown in Figure 6.3 .
There are a number of important advantages to this approach that are lacking in existingtransaction security solutions. The most important beneﬁt is the ability to reuse the sameembedded hardware platform and not force the user to adopt an external foreign device. Someembedded systems are fully contained as well as space and cost constrained, making itimpractical to add additional hardware.Emerging Applications 363

--- Page 373 ---
When a human is in the loop, reuse of the graphical interface promotes a natural usability. The
trusted display manager has the full deﬁnition of the endpoint device’s graphics in which tocraft its veriﬁcation dialog. By taking maximum advantage of the display, the user is not onlyguaranteed to receive and notice veriﬁcation requests from properly conﬁgured servers, but theuser experience also is guaranteed to be far better than can be achieved in a small form-factorattached device.
End-to-end network transaction security will be improved by applying the same high-
assurance methodology on the server side. This can be done either by using a networktransaction appliance (containing the trusted hypervisor/operating system and communicationsserver) in the server’s network or by adopting a similar virtualization architecture used in theclient endpoint. As seen in Figure 6.4 , out-of-band secure communication subsystems on both
ends of the transaction provide a connection that both client and server can trust.INTEGRITY Transaction Verification WindowINTEGRITY Transaction Verification Window
Server: www.mybank.com
withdrawal
YES, I accept
No, this transaction is invalid$432.00
$Transaction Type:
Amount:
Please confirm amount by typing it here: 
Password:
Auto OTP:  2969483895039456
Figure 6.3:
Trusted transaction veriﬁcation dialog.
Figure 6.4:
Applying secure hypervisor/microkernel architecture to both endpoints.364 Chapter 6

--- Page 374 ---
Using a trusted operating system for the server-side security protects against MITM and
malware by fully sandboxing the end-to-end secure communications components.
6.1.5.3 Cryptosystem and PKI Policy Enforcement
Key Point
End-to-end control of the transaction connection also can protect against PKI and cryptosystem
weaknesses by enforcing the use of strong public key, bulk encryption, and Message Authenti-cation Code (MAC) algorithms and key lengths instead of relying on the native web server and itsdefault TLS implementation.
For example, the communications server might disallow the use of the weak MD5 hash
algorithm and require the use of elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) with 384-bit or larger keylengths for the public key cryptosystem. Furthermore, because public key cryptography is usedto negotiate and derive the symmetric key used for bulk encryption, the policy can ensure thatpublic key length provides a strength that is commensurate with the underlying symmetriccryptosystems.
A trusted hypervisor/operating system-based infrastructure can even be used as its own certiﬁcate
authority. Pharming attacks are unable to thwart transaction assurance because legitimate clientsand servers always know when they are communicating with valid peers on the other end.
TLS is designed to be ﬂexible, handling backward compatibility and dealing with the realities
of a complex web world with many types of servers and clients. However, this ﬂexibility leadsto vulnerabilities, such as the weakness in TLS, discussed in Chapter 5, that enables an MITMto downgrade the cryptographic strength used in the protocol. Control of both ends of theconnection via the secure communications server enables policy to be enforced at the TLSlevel. This policy can drastically improve overall system security. For example, the policy canrequire that the client authenticate itself to the server (client authentication is optional in theTLS standard).
Modern society has become increasingly dependent on the security of network transactions
over wide area networks. Network transactions are used for commerce and banking, and toremotely control critical infrastructure. Embedded systems that employ insecure endpointoperating systems and applications are unable to provide the requisite security for high-valuetransactions. As evidenced by the growth of trends such as cloud computing and Software asa Service (SaaS), the security impact of successful cyber attacks is likely to grow. The goodnews is that high-assurance methodology and certiﬁed high-robustness technologies can breakthrough the insecurity status quo and do so without sacriﬁcing the world’s legacy operatingsystems and applications. The only thing we need is the determination to think outside the boxand apply these new techniques creatively and effectively.Emerging Applications 365

--- Page 375 ---
6.2 Automotive Security
In Chapter 1, we discussed a troubling 2010 university research project in which a team of
researchers successfully hacked critical safety-related systems (engine, breaks) over thelow-security in-car network and how modern automobiles are now regularly beingconnected to wide area networks using wireless technologies. The combination of thesesituations results in viable attack vectors against national infrastructure by sophisticatedthreat agents. As we also discussed in Chapter 1, compounding the challenge forembedded systems developers is the incredible electronic control unit (ECU) complexityexplosion in modern vehicles, with upwards of 200 microprocessors found in some high-end models.
In addition to embedded system count and complexity, multiple networks of varying type,
including Controller Area Network (CAN), FlexRay, Local Interconnect Network (LIN), andMedia Oriented Systems Transport (MOST), connect these ECUs. The car OEM integratesnetworked ECU components and software from dozens of Tier-1 and Tier-2 suppliers. Whilethe OEM often deﬁnes requirements for these ECUs, it does not rigorously control their actualcontents or development process.
It should come as no surprise that this situation has become untenable. OEMs are suffering
from the longest pole in the tent syndrome: a single ECU, delivered late or with serious
reliability problems, may be all that is needed to cause shipping delays or customer-visiblefailures that lead to recalls and poor reputation. Add to this the new challenge of security:a single vulnerability in a critical component, such as the gateway to safety-critical networksand functions, can allow in remote attackers.
While we mentioned a few key areas for improving security in this environment, we revisit
automotive security in more detail here.
6.2.1 Vehicular Security Threats and Mitigations
The realm of security threats to cars can be coarsely classiﬁed in three domains: local-physical,remote, and internal-electronic. Combinations of these threat domains will often be required toinﬂict damage.
6.2.1.1 Local-PhysicalExamples of local-physical threat would be someone physically tapping into the
drivetrain’s CAN network and disrupting communications or damaging an ECU via powersurge or excessive heat application. Such an invasive attack can quite easily disable criticalcar functions. However, a local attacker, such as a disgruntled mechanic or malignedspouse, can harm only one car and is therefore unlikely to get the attention ofsecurity teams. Furthermore, a car’s massively complex, distributed electronic system is366 Chapter 6

--- Page 376 ---
simply impractical to protect from physical attack. So we generally punt on this class of
threats.
There is, however, one exception, and it is an important one. Somewhere within one or more
ECUs, private cryptographic keys are stored for use in creating protected communicationchannels and to provide local data protection services. Communications may include car toservice center or other OEM infrastructure, car to multimedia provider, car to car, car to powergrid (in electric vehicles), car to smartphone, or even car to bank. Figure 6.5 shows some
examples of long-range radio connections in next-generation vehicles.
Data-at-rest protection may be required for automotive algorithms, multimedia content, and
cryptographic material.
Private keys must be kept in storage that can withstand sophisticated physical attacks, both
invasive and non-invasive, because the loss of even a single private key may enable an attackerto establish connections into remote infrastructures where widespread damage and propertyloss can ensue. OEMs must be able to achieve high assurance of key protection across the
Figure 6.5:
Examples of next-generation extra-vehicular networks communications.Emerging Applications 367

--- Page 377 ---
entire life cycle, from creation to embedment into ECUs, delivery and integration within the
car, and in the ﬁeld. Embedded systems cryptographic experts can help OEMs and theirsuppliers with guidance and oversight in this area.
6.2.1.2 RemoteRemote threats are the classics: a hacker tries to probe the car’s long-range radio interfaces for
vulnerabilities in network security protocols, web services, and applications to ﬁnd a way intothe internal electronics complex. Unlike high-end data centers, the car is unlikely to beoutﬁtted with a full complement of IDS, IPS, ﬁrewalls, and UTMs. Regardless, recentintrusions at Sony, Citigroup, Amazon, Google, and RSA starkly demonstrate that thesedefense mechanisms are Swiss cheese against sophisticated attackers. Clearly, the car’scritical systems must be strongly isolated from ECUs and networks not critical for safeoperation.
Key Point
Whenever possible, complete physical isolation of critical automotive ECUs from network-
connected vehicular infrastructure should be imposed.
6.2.1.3 Internal-Electronic
While physical network isolation is desirable, touch points will inevitably exist. For example,
the car’s navigation system, in some markets, must be disabled while the car is in motion,implying communication between systems of widely differing safety criticality. Furthermore,a strong future trend toward consolidationd where more powerful multi-core microprocessors
are used to host disparate systems, turning many ECUs into virtual ECUs dincreases the risk of
software-borne threats such as privilege escalation due to operating system vulnerabilities,side-channel attacks on cryptography, and denials of service.
Therefore, the car’s internal electronics architecture must be designed from the ground up for
security. Touch points between critical and non-critical systems and networks must be justiﬁedat the highest management levels, and these electronic touch points must be analyzed andcertiﬁed devoid of vulnerabilities at the very highest assurance levels, such as ISO 15408(Common Criteria) evaluated assurance level (EAL) 6 þ.
PHASEdPrinciples of High-Assurance Software Engineering, described in Chapter 3, which
espouses minimization of complexity, software component architecture, principle of leastprivilege, secure software and systems development process, and independent expert securityvalidationd must be learned and adopted by OEMs and promulgated to ECU suppliers.
Car manufacturers and tier-1s may not have been thinking a lot about security when they designedthe cars hitting roads today, but clearly that must change. Manufacturers must work closely with368 Chapter 6

--- Page 378 ---
embedded security specialists early in the design and architecture of in-car electronics and
networks and must raise the bar on security-driven engineering and software assurance.
6.3 Secure Android
At recent Embedded Systems Conferences, Android operating-system-related courses havemet with startling popularity. Embedded systems designers are considering the use ofAndroid for all forms of human-machine interfaces (HMIs) in practically all major embeddedsystems-related industries: automotive head units, medical device graphical interfaces, andhome smart energy management panels, just to name a few. Android brings to the embeddedsystems community the power of open source Linux augmented with the graphical interfacesand app store infrastructure of one of the world’s most popular mobile operating systems. Inaddition, the rapidly emerging market for Android Mobile Device Management (MDM)solutions provides embedded systems developers with the promise of a world-class remotedevice management infrastructure that can seamlessly tie in to traditional back-end ITsystems. MDM functions include remote monitoring and auditing, ﬁrmware update,
application conﬁguration management and control, data-at-rest encryption, VPN services,
remote wipe (e.g., when an embedded device is believed to be compromised), and more. It isno wonder embedded systems developers are intrigued, wondering how Android can maketheir next designs far more functional by taking advantage of the powerful open sourceAndroid movement.
A signiﬁcant portion of expert instruction on embedded Android centers regarding how to
achieve common critical embedded system requirements for real-time response and safety and/or security-critical operation using a mobile operating system is not designed for this. Sincethis book is about embedded security, let’s focus on the security challenge.
6.3.1 Android Security Retrospective
As part of Android’s original introduction in 2008, Google touted improved security in itssmartphones. Google’s website touted the platform’s security: “A central design point of theAndroid security architecture is that no application, by default, has permission to perform anyoperations that would adversely impact other applications, the operating system, or the user.”
21
Days after release of the ﬁrst Android phone, the G1, a well-publicized, severe vulnerabilitywas found in the phone’s web browser. But the G1’s security woes didn’t end there. InNovember, hackers discovered a way to install arbitrary programs on the phone, prompting thislament from Google: “We tried really hard to secure Android. This is deﬁnitely a big bug. Thereason why we consider it a large security issue is because root access on the device breaks ourapplication sandbox.”
22In fact, the Android bug would silently and invisibly interpret every
word typed as a command and execute the command with superuser privileges.23A ZDnet
writer called this vulnerability the “Worst. Bug. Ever.”Emerging Applications 369

--- Page 379 ---
In late 2010, security researchers uploaded to the Android market a spoofed Angry Birds
game application that invisibly downloads other apps without the user’s approval orknowledge. The extra downloads were malicious, stealing the phone’s location informationand contacts and sending illicit text messages. This research demonstrated arguably themost deleterious example of least privilege principle failure: a completely untrustedapplication downloaded from the Internet has the privilege to bring down arbitrarysoftware and access sensitive data on the device. As part of their work, the researchersreported numerous other weaknesses in Android, including a faulty use of SSL, lack of appauthentication, an easy method of breaking out of the Android Dalvik virtualmachine sandbox via native code, and the focus of the attack, a weak permissionsarchitecture.
24
Next, we revisit our favorite website, the U.S. CERT National Vulnerability Database. A searchon Android turns up numerous vulnerabilities of varying severity. Here is a sampling of theworst offenders:
CVE-2011-0680: Allowsremote
 attackers to read SMS messages intended for other
recipientsCVE-2010-1807: Allows remote attackers to execute arbitrary code
CVE-2009-2999, -2656: Allows remote attackers to cause a denial of service (application
restart and network disconnection)CVE-2009-1754: Allows remote attackers to access application data
CVE-2009-0985, -0986: Buffer overﬂows allow remote attackers to execute arbitrary
code
We point out these particular vulnerabilities because they fall into the most serious severitycategory
of remote exploitability.
These vulnerabilities are speciﬁc to the Android stack that runs on top of Linux. Android is, ofcourse, also susceptible to Linux kernel vulnerabilities. In Chapter 1, we presented a case studyof Linux complexity, referring to a 2008 paper written by a few of the leading Linux kerneldevelopers. Those authors have since published an update of their Linux kernel developmentstatistical overview,
25and the numbers are truly staggering. With more than 20,000 lines of
code modiﬁed per day at times during the development cycle, 6,000 unique authors, and the
rapid growth in its overall code base, it should come as no surprise that dozens of Linux kernel
vulnerabilities are reported each year and that a steady stream of undiscovered vulnerabilities
are latent in every Linux distribution deployed to the ﬁeld. While a signiﬁcant portion of thegrowth and churn in the Linux kernel code base is due to adding support for newmicroprocessors and peripherals, the core kernel itself, such as networking and ﬁle systemsupport, also undergoes rapid change. CVE-2009-1185 documents a ﬂaw in the Linux netlinksocket implementation and is but one example of a Linux vulnerability that has been allegedlyused to compromise Android devices.370 Chapter 6

--- Page 380 ---
6.3.2 Android Device Rooting
Android rooting (also known as jailbreaking ) is the process of replacing the manufacturer-
installed kernel (Linux) and/or its critical ﬁle system partitions. Once a device is rooted, the hacker
can change Android’s behavior to suit her particular desires. The term rooting originates from the
UNIX concept of root privilege, needed to modify protected functions. The goals of Androidhackers range from the hobbyist’s desire to overclock a CPU for better performance (at theexpense of battery life) and install custom applications to more malicious pursuits such as illegallyobtaining carrier network services and installing key loggers and SMS snoopers. The collection ofnew and replaced ﬁles installed by the hacker is referred to as a custom ROM , another imperfect
reference to the concept of ﬁrmware that is often deployed in read-only memory.
Hackers often use Android vulnerabilities to root Android phones.
Key Point
The rate of Android vulnerability discovery is such that practically every Android-based
consumer device has been rooted within a short period of time, sometimes within a day or two
of release.
In addition to software vulnerabilities, secure boot problems are another major source of
Android rooting attacks. Some Android device makers, such as Barnes & Noble with its NookColor, have permitted (if not encouraged) rooting to facilitate a wider developer communityand device sales. In this case, rooting is usually accomplished with a form of side loading/booting using an SD card or USB to host or install the custom ROM. The manufacturer-installed boot loader does not cryptographically authenticate the Android ﬁrmware, paving theway for ROM execution.
Some device makers have gone to pains to prevent rooting for various reasons. Obviously,
many embedded developers using Android will want to lock down the Android OS completelyto prevent unauthorized medication and malicious tampering. One of the most high-proﬁlesecure boot failures in this realm is the Amazon Kindle. The presumed aim of locking down theKindle is to force users to access Amazon content and require use of the Kindle e-readersoftware. The Amazon secure boot approach attempted to authenticate critical system ﬁles atstartup using digital signature checks. Hackers used vulnerabilities in Linux to circumventthese checks and run malicious boot code, rooting the device. Information about the successfulintrusion can be found on the public Internet. It is interesting to note that Amazon abandonedits anti-rooting posture with the Kindle Fire tablet.
Yes, we paint a grim picture of Android security. However, the picture is based on simple facts
that ought not be surprising: Android was never designed to provide high assurance of securityfunctions.Emerging Applications 371

--- Page 381 ---
6.3.3 Mobile Phone Data Protection: A Case Study of Defense-in-Depth
Android’s tremendous popularity juxtaposed with its lack of strong security has sparked
a rigorous scramble by software vendors, device OEMs, systems integrators, and governmentsecurity evaluators to ﬁnd wa ys to retroﬁt improve d system security to Android-based
devices.
Key Point
One approach to raising the level of assurance in data protection within an Android-based device
is to employ multiple encryption layers.
An Android smartphone, for example, can use a layer four (OSI model) SSL VPN client to
establish a protected data communication session. An IPsec VPN application, running at layerthree, can be used to create a second, independent connection between the smartphone and theremote endpoint (see Figure 6.6 ). This secondary connection uses independent public keys to
represent the static identities of the endpoints. The data in transit is doubly encrypted by thesetwo concurrent connections. This layered security approach is an example of defense-in-
depth .
Key Point
The concept of defense-in-depth originates in the military: multiple layers of defense, such as
a combination of mines and barbed wire, rather than just mines or barbed wire alone, to increasethe probability of a successful defense as well as potentially to slow the progress of an attacker.
Defense-in-depth has been successfully applied in war since ancient times, and the concept is
alive and well in the information security world.
Let’s consider a few of the threats against an SSL data protection application. An attacker can
directly attack the application, perhaps exploiting a ﬂaw in the SSL software stack, to disableencryption entirely or steal the encryption keys residing in RAM during operation. An attacker
Figure 6.6:
SSL/IPsec within android’s native sandboxes.372 Chapter 6

--- Page 382 ---
can try to steal the static public SSL keys stored on disk. If these keys are compromised, the
attacker can impersonate the associated identity to gain access to the remote client overa malicious SSL session. Malware elsewhere in the Android system can use side-channelattacks to break the SSL encryption and recover its keys.
Layered SSL/IPsec data protection is a sensible application of defense-in-depth to counter
these threats. If an attacker is able to break the SSL encryption, the IPsec layer will continue toprotect the data. An attacker may be able to steal the SSL keys but not the IPsec keys. Theattacker may be able to install malware into the SSL application but not the IPsec application.The SSL application may exhibit side-channel weaknesses to which the IPsec application isimmune. To succeed, the attacker must break both the SSL and IPsec encryption layers.
Clearly, this layered approach depends on the independence of the layers. The runtime
environment must provide strong isolation of the SSL and IPsec application layers, and theruntime environment itself must not provide an attack surface through which to break thatisolation. Much of the research and product development aimed at Android security hasfocused, in one form or another, on providing sandboxes for data isolation and the protectedexecution of critical functions. Those sandboxes would be used to realize the layeredencryption approach. Let’s now compare and contrast the various approaches at Androidsandboxing. Embedded developers considering the adoption of Android in their next-generation designs can use this comparison to make sensible security choices.
6.3.4 Android Sandboxing Approaches
6.3.4.1 Separate Hardware
One potential sandboxing approach is to have multiple microprocessors dedicated to the
differing tasks. While Android smartphone OEMs are unlikely to add additional hardware costto their designs, embedded systems developers may have more options depending on manyfactors, including form factor ﬂexibility. For example, a PCI-capable design may be able tohost an IPsec VPN card that wraps the second layer encryption around the main processor’sAndroid SSL. In some cases, however, the additional hardware size, weight, power, and costwill be prohibitive for this approach.
6.3.4.2 Multi-BootThe multi-boot concept has been attempted on a handful of laptops and netbooks over the
years. In a dual-boot laptop scenario, a secondary operating system, typically a scaled-downLinux, can be launched in lieu of the main platform operating system. The scaled-down systemis typically used only for web browsing, and the primary goal is to enable the user to beginbrowsing within a handful of seconds from cold boot. The secondary operating system residesin separate storage and is never running at the same time as the primary platform operatingsystem. In some cases, the lightweight environment executes on a secondary microprocessorEmerging Applications 373

--- Page 383 ---
(e.g., an ARM SoC independent of the netbook’s main Intel processor). On an Android mobile
device, the primary Android can be hosted on internal NAND ﬂash, and a secondary Androidcould be hosted on an inserted microSD card (see Figure 6.7 ).
The secondary operating system has good isolation from a safety perspective; however, theinconvenience of rebooting and inability to seamlessly switch between environments hasseverely limited adoption. The multi-boot option is also impractical for the layered encryptionuse case that requires concurrent execution of the sandboxes.
6.3.4.3 WebtopThe webtop concept provides a limited browsing environment (the webtop) independent from
the primary operating system environment. However, instead of a dual boot, the webtop runs asa set of applications on top of the primary operating system. In the case of the Motorola AtrixAndroid smartphone, released in 2011, the webtop sandbox is an independent ﬁle systempartition that contains a limited Ubuntu Linux-based personality (see Figure 6.8 ). The primary
Android partition is located on the same internal NAND ﬂash device within the phone. TheAtrix webtop is intended to provide a desktop-like environment for users that dock the phoneon a separately purchased keyboard/video/mouse (KVM) apparatus.
Figure 6.7:
Dual-boot android.
Figure 6.8:
Android webtop environment.374 Chapter 6

--- Page 384 ---
While webtop was most likely not intended as a security capability, one mapping of this
approach to the layered encryption use case is to execute IPsec from the primary Androidenvironment and an SSL-based web session from the webtop sandbox. The problem with thisapproach is that the isolation of the webtop’s SSL from the Android IPsec depends on the entireLinux kernel, including its TCP/IP stack.
6.3.4.4 Mobile Device Management Encrypted ContainersThe growing popularity of Android mobile devices and desire to use them in the workplace has
spawned dozens of Mobile Device Management (MDM) products and companies.
Key Point
The two main purposes of Mobile Device Management are to provide mobile data protection and
IT management services.
Manageability includes application conﬁguration (ensuring that all employees have an
approved set of pre-loaded software), auditing, document management, and remote wipe(disabling the handset when an employee leaves the company). Data protection covers bothdata at rest and data in transit (e.g., VPN to the corporate network).
Android MDM solutions often use application-level encryption. For example, an enterprise e-
mail client may implement its own encryption protocol for the connection between mobiledevice and enterprise e-mail server and its own encryption of the e-mail folders resident on thephone.
Some MDM solutions use Android proﬁles to divide the Android system into two sets of
applications: one for the user’s personal environment and one for the enterprise-managedenvironment (see Figure 6.9 ). When the enterprise proﬁle is invoked, the MDM product may
automatically turn on encryption for data associated with that proﬁle.
Secondary User
Profile
Encrypted Data
Mobile MicroprocessorAndroidTM
Figure 6.9:
MDM containers.Emerging Applications 375

--- Page 385 ---
Clearly, this approach can be used to implement the layered encryption use case: the MDM
application can create an SSL connection on top of the underlying Android’s IPsec connection.
However, once again, the security of both layers relies on the underlying Android operating
system.
6.3.4.5 Remoting
Key Point
One approach to enterprise data protection in Android is not to allow any of the enterprise data
on the mobile device itself. Rather, the only way to access enterprise information is using a remotedesktop and/or application virtualization.
When the device is not connected to the enterprise (e.g., ofﬂine operation), enterprise
applications and services are unavailable.
Remoting precludes the requirement for local data protection; however, our use case for
layered data-in-motion protection remains. The remoting application (see Figure 6.10 )
provides SSL encryption while the underlying Android runs IPsec.
However, once again, the security of both layers relies on the underlying Android operating
system.
6.3.4.6 Type-2 HypervisorType-2 hypervisors, introduced in Chapter 2, are similar to webtops and MDM containers in
that the secondary environment runs as an application on top of the primary operating system.However, instead of hosting only a browser, the secondary persona is a full-ﬂedged guestoperating system running within a virtual machine created by the hypervisor application (seeFigure 6.11 ). The hypervisor uses the primary operating system to handle I/O and other
resource management functions.
Figure 6.10:
Remoting.376 Chapter 6

--- Page 386 ---
Type-2 mobile hypervisor products are used to provide an enterprise management persona
on top of the primary Android environment. The virtualized Android can use an SSLconnection to the enterprise while the underlying Android’s IPsec is also used to wrap thecommunication between endpoints.
However, once again, the Type-2 model fails to provide strong isolation. Faults or security
vulnerabilities in the primary general-purpose operating system will impact the criticalfunctions running in the virtual machine. Furthermore, Type-2 hypervisor applicationsdeployed in the enterprise space have themselves been found to contain vulnerabilities thatbreak the sandbox.
6.3.4.7 Sandboxes Built on SandConstant readers, if you have diligently been absorbing the concepts of systems software
security (Chapter 2), secure software development (Chapter 3), and the remainder of this book,then we hope you observe as obvious the common weakness among all the commonsandboxing approaches previously described. Multiple Android applications, MDMcontainers, remoting applications, webtops, and Type-2 hypervisors all attempt to retroﬁtsecurity to the Android environment itself. As we demonstrated in detail earlier in this chapter,the Android/Linux system, while providing rich multimedia functionality of which embeddeddesigns can take good advantage, is riddled with security vulnerabilities that simply cannot beﬁxed. High-assurance security must be designed from the beginning.
However, while high assurance cannot be retroﬁtted to Android itself, it can be retroﬁtted at
a system level. Let’s look at how.
6.3.4.8 Type-1 HypervisorType-1 hypervisors, introduced in Chapter 2, also provide functional completeness and
concurrent execution of a secondary enterprise persona. However, because the hypervisor runson the bare metal, persona isolation cannot be violated by weaknesses in the persona operatingsystem. Thus, a Type-1 hypervisor represents a promising approach from both a functionality
Figure 6.11:
Type-2 hypervisor.Emerging Applications 377

--- Page 387 ---
and security perspective. However, the hypervisor vulnerability threat still exists, and not all
Type-1 hypervisors are designed to meet high levels of safety and security.
One particular variant, the microkernel-based Type-1 hypervisor, is speciﬁcally designed to
meet security-critical requirements. As discussed in Chapter 2, microkernels provide a superiorarchitecture for safety and security relative to large, general-purpose operating systems such asLinux and Android.
In a microkernel Type-1 hypervisor, system virtualization is built as a service on the
microkernel. Thus, in addition to isolated virtual machines, the microkernel provides an openstandard interface for lightweight critical applications, which cannot be entrusted to a general-purpose guest. For example, SSL can be hosted as a microkernel application, providing thehighest possible level of assurance for this encryption layer. IPsec packets originating fromAndroid are doubly encrypted with the high-assurance SSL layer service before transmissionover the wireless interface (see Figure 6.12 ).
The real-time microkernel is an excellent choice for embedded systems since the microkernelcan host any embedded, real-time applications not appropriate for the Android/Linuxenvironment.
The microkernel Type-1 hypervisor typically uses the microprocessor MMU to isolate the
memory spaces of the primary Android environment and the native SSL encryptionapplication. However, device drivers in Android may use DMA that can violate the memorypartitioning by bypassing the MMU entirely. Potential approaches to guarding this attackvector include running the hypervisor in TrustZone on an applicable ARM-basedmicroprocessor, using an IOMMU, or mediating all DMA bus masters. TrustZone andIOMMUs are discussed further in Chapter 2.
The isolation properties of some secure microkernels can even protect against sophisticated
covert and side-channel software-borne attacks.
Figure 6.12:
Microkernel Type-1 hypervisor approach to layered data-in-motion encryption.378 Chapter 6

--- Page 388 ---
6.3.4.9 Physical Security
Key Point
Once we have an approach that prevents software attacks from breaking the sandbox between
protection layers, the embedded device may beneﬁt from taking defense-in-depth a step furtherto protect the layered encryption system from physical attacks using an attached secure element.
A lost or stolen mobile device in the hands of a sophisticated attacker, for example, is
susceptible to memory snooping, power analysis, and other invasive and non-invasive physicalattacks. While physical protection of the entire embedded system may not be practical,targeted physical protections can make a huge difference in overall system security.
As discussed in Chapter 4, a secure element can be used to provide physical protection of
critical parameters, including private keys. The native microkernel SSL service’s static publickey can be housed in a secure element. For example, a smart card can be incorporated intoa microSD device (that can simultaneously be used for additional secure storage) and attachedto a smartphone or embedded system (see Figure 6.13 ). Of course, implementations will vary
depending on the types and sophistication of physical protections available. Embeddedsystems designers can examine the FIPS 140 certiﬁcation level and product documentation tocompare and contrast offerings.
Key Point
Layered encryption as a defense-in-depth strategy is a sensible approach to increasing the
assurance of Android-based data protection services; however, what is not sensible is to run bothlayers within the Android environment itself.
Figure 6.13:
Adding physical security protection via attached smart card to the microkernel Type-1 hypervisor.Emerging Applications 379

--- Page 389 ---
There is simply too much vulnerability to prevent both layers from being simultaneously
subverted. Embedded systems designers considering Android must also carefully sandboxcritical security functions outside the Android system. Modern embedded microprocessors andsystem software solutions provide the requisite features to get the best of both worlds: thepower of Android’s multimedia and applications deployment infrastructure alongside, butsecurely separated from, critical system security functions.
6.4 Next-Generation Software-Deﬁned Radio
6.4.1 Red-Black Separation
Software-deﬁned radios (SDRs) that process classiﬁed information are typically architectedwith a standard red-black separation in which a red side is responsible for sensitive informationprocessing and cryptographic functions, and the black-side processor is responsible forcommunication stacks and drivers. The red and black sides are hosted on separate hardwarecomponents. In fact, the red side is usually composed of both a general-purpose processor anda separate cryptographic processor.
On egress, classiﬁed information originated in the red side is encrypted and sent over some
interconnect to the black side for transmission. On ingress, information received by black-sidedrivers is passed across the interconnect for decryption and any other red-side processing, suchas guards and authentication. This general architecture is shown in Figure 6.14 .
Note that the logical red-side crypto component may include an attached special-purposehardware device, such as an FPGA, for cryptographic algorithm execution, key storage, andphysical redundancy. Any software running within the cryptographic boundary falls under the
Figure 6.14:
Traditional communications device red-black architecture.380 Chapter 6

--- Page 390 ---
intense scrutiny of the NSA during Type-1 certiﬁcation. This naturally imposes a strict
assurance demand and complexity limit upon the red-side software.
6.4.2 Software-Deﬁned Radio Architecture
Now let’s look at the red-black architecture in more detail, using the example of a software-deﬁned radio (SDR). More speciﬁcally, let’s consider devices that employ the SoftwareCommunications Architecture (SCA), an open framework used to develop SDRs. The SCAprovides standardized APIs for managing waveforms and other radio-relevant resources. TheSCA lives on top of an SCA-compliant operating system. In an SDR, the SCA may be used inboth the red and black sides. The black side will typically include components required to
manage radio communications, including the waveforms themselves. Therefore, a real-time
operating system (RTOS) is often essential.
The red side may use less of the SCA’s functionality. At a minimum, SCA-standardized
message passing and component management functions would be included. Of critical note,however, is the role of the red side in managing plaintext. Human-machine interface (HMI)components, such as keyboard drivers, voice codecs, and touch-screen management software,will be included in the red-side processing. For example, a handheld radio operator may speakvoice data that must be collected by the red side for cryptographic processing before it can besent across to the black side for transmission.
As with any Type-1 communications device, minimizing the certiﬁcation-relevant software
content in the red side is a strategic goal of SDR developers as well as the certifying agency.Because ofits real-time and security-critical requirements, a trusted RTOS is a natural ﬁt. A samplearchitecture showing the major red- and black-side SDR components is shown in Figure 6.15 .
Figure 6.15:
Traditional software-deﬁned radio architecture.Emerging Applications 381

--- Page 391 ---
6.4.3 Enter Linux
While an analog voice radio has a relatively simple HMI, multi-purpose digital voice/data
radios may incorporate a far more sophisticated HMI. Linux and its variants are obviouschoices for implementation of the HMI due to the availability of popular HMI frameworkswidely deployed in the consumer electronics industry. As we discussed in the precedingAndroid case study and in Chapter 1, Linux, a monolithic operating system, does not meethigh-assurance certiﬁcation requirements and is not appropriate for low-latency, hard real-timetasks. To incorporate Linux into the red-side HMI of secure communications devices withoutbringing its entire multi-million-line source code base into the cryptographic boundary, anobvious choice is to incorporate a second applications processor dedicated to Linux. Addinga second processor, however, increases footprint, power, production cost, and systemcomplexity. This is especially problematic in resource-constrained devices, such as battery-powered radios.
When they have been incorporated using secondary red-side processors, general-purpose
operating systems are typically used only for unclassiﬁed communications. Classiﬁedcommunications require custom HMI interfaces to achieve high assurance of the integrity andavailability of sensitive data and commands. The Holy Grail, of course, is to incorporate Linuxinto the original red processor without sacriﬁcing real-time performance; jeopardizingsecurity; increasing certiﬁcation overhead; or growing system footprint, weight, power, andcost. Furthermore, we want to use Linux for classiﬁed as well as unclassiﬁed interfaces,enabling the user to fully realize the rich productivity beneﬁts of Linux.
This goal is made possible using a microkernel-based Type-1 hypervisor, where the
microkernel is an MILS separation kernel. Chapter 2 describes MILS and MILS separationkernels. The separation kernel can host Linux in a securely compartmentalized virtualmachine. However, unlike traditional hypervisors, the MILS separation kernel can host nativeapplications as well as guests. The separation kernel’s strict resource scheduling andprotection mechanisms ensure that the virtual machine and its constituent applications areunable to impact th e execution of c ritical applications. The separation kernel is the only
software that runs in the processor’s most privileged mode. The mechanism of systemvirtualization depends on the processor’s speciﬁc hardware capabilities. As discussed inChapter 2, modern embedded processors are increasingly incorporating hardwarevirtualization acceleration, which enables virtual machine management to be as simple andefﬁcient as possible.
The separation kernel can provide a strictly controlled inter-process communication (IPC) path
between the Linux HMI and other red-side applications as needed. For example, InternetProtocol data originating from the Linux network subsystem can be transmitted over the IPCpipe to the crypto subsystem for encryption and transmission. Application of the MILS
virtualization concept to the SDR example is shown in Figure 6.16 .382 Chapter 6

--- Page 392 ---
The difﬁculty of using Linux for managing classiﬁed communications, however, remains. For
example, let’s consider the use of a Linux touch-screen widget to enter the sensitive command“zeroize all cryptographic keys now.” Mission success may depend on the commandinformation passing correctly through Linux to the cryptographic subsystem. Yet the lowassurance of Linux makes it impossible to make the necessary integrity and availabilityguarantees. Again, MILS virtualization provides a solution. In the MILS virtualizationarchitecture, the physical graphics device is controlled exclusively by a trusted applicationrunning on the MILS separation kernel; Linux has access only to virtualized devices. Thus,when a command is entered through Linux and across the virtualized interface, a trustedapplication can check the command. The command is committed only if the user is satisﬁedthat Linux has faithfully transmitted his intent. This veriﬁcation stage provides an MILS-enforced trusted path from user to high-assurance components; Linux is completely out of theloop.
6.4.4 Multi-Domain Radio
Some software-deﬁned radios must manage information at varying classiﬁcation levels.Default policy requires that information at different levels be kept physically isolated.Typically, this is accomplished in one of two ways. One method is to require a cold restart, inwhich writable hardware resources are zeroized so as to safely switch the device betweensecurity levels. This approach is unfriendly to users, and the reboot could delaycommunications and impact mission effectiveness. The second approach is to incorporatea discrete red-side processor for each security level and only require a secure switch of thehuman interface devices (e.g., display, keyboard). Once again, the extra processing elementswill increase the footprint, production cost, and system complexity of the device. MILS
Figure 6.16:
MILS virtualization of linux in SDR.Emerging Applications 383

--- Page 393 ---
virtualization also solves the multi-domain problem. Separate instances of any required
subsystems, including virtual machines and SCA frameworks, can be strictly isolated andscheduled by the MILS separation kernel. In addition, the separation kernel’s ability to hostnative applications can solve the shared human interface device problem: a trusted multi-levelsecure (MLS) HMI application can run directly on the separation kernel, multiplexing multi-domain I/O based on focus input from the user that is captured directly by the MLScomponent. The multi-domain MILS virtualization architecture for an SDR is shown inFigure 6.17 .
While the architectures described in Figures 6.16 and 6.17 can be implemented using
a single-core processor, the advent of multi-core embedded processors can make them morepractical. As can be seen from these examples, the sophisticated red-side processingincludes numerous components, many of which can execute concurrently on multiple cores,under supervision of a multi-core-aware separation kernel. This extra horsepower enablesgood performance for virtual machines while ensuring real-time behavior for criticalapplications.
The rich functionality of the latest multimedia software packages, such as Linux, can be
incorporated into even the most demanding real-time, secure military communicationsdevices without increasing hardware footprint, cost, or certiﬁcation burden. The keyinnovation is MILS virtualization, which exploits the resource management capabilities,native applications environment, and assurance pedigree of a trusted separation kernel andmodern hypervisor techniques to effectively consolidate general-purpose and criticalsubsystems.
Figure 6.17:
Multi-domain SDR with multi-instance linux virtual machines and high-assurance
MLS components.384 Chapter 6

--- Page 394 ---
6.5 Key Points
1. Much of the world’s commerce and critical infrastructure control depends on the security
of network transactions.
2. For as little as $25,000, a sophisticated hacker will break into most any network, even the
most strenuously protected enterprise data centers.
3. Transaction security is deﬁned by the ability of both client and server to have trust in the
authenticity, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of the messages that are sent and received by
both parties throughout the transaction.
4. Man-in-the-middle attacks are possible not only on unencrypted links, but also with
encrypted links, such as an SSL-protected HTTP connection, by exploiting weaknesses inthe cryptographic infrastructure or underlying operating systems.
5. In general, social engineering attacks are increasingly prevalent and effective, due in part
to the growing sophistication of hackers who are willing to mine the Internet for personaldata that can be used to launch attacks and the increasing use of social networking siteslike Facebook that draw more personal data into the public domain and make that datamore readily accessible.
6. Similar to man-in-the-middle attacks, DNS-based pharming attacks are particularly
dangerous because neither the client nor the server must necessarily be subverted for theattack to succeed.
7. Without a dramatic improvement in secure design and assurance, the dual trend of
increasing software defects and attacker sophistication converges to a total loss ofconﬁdence in shared networks such as the Internet as a medium for commerce or othercritical network-based computing.
8. The problem with anti-malware software is that it is fundamentally a reactive technology;
as new vulnerabilities and attack methods are discovered, the anti-malware protocolsquickly become obsolete.
9. An encouraging approach to transaction security involves sandboxing the embedded web
client from the rest of the computing environment; the theory is that a sandboxed browseris less likely to be infected with malware and therefore more likely to be trusted for securetransactions.
10. Out-of-band transaction veriﬁcation is a compelling approach because it enables both
client and server to obtain a higher level of conﬁdence in the authenticity of each other’s
identity as well as the actual information being transacted.
11. End-to-end control of the transaction connection also can protect against PKI and
cryptosystem weaknesses by enforcing the use of strong public key, bulk encryption, and
Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithms and key lengths instead of relying onthe native web server and its default TLS implementation.
12. Whenever possible, complete physical isolation of critical automotive ECUs from
network-connected vehicular infrastructure should be imposed.Emerging Applications 385

--- Page 395 ---
13. The rate of Android vulnerability discovery is such that practically every Android-based
consumer device has been rooted within a short period of time, sometimes within a day or
two of release.
14. One approach to raising the level of assurance in data protection within an Android-based
device is to employ multiple encryption layers.
15. The concept of defense-in-depth originates in the military: multiple layers of defense,
such as a combination of mines and barbed wire, rather than just mines or barbed wirealone, to increase the probability of a successful defense as well as potentially to slow theprogress of an attacker.
16. The two main purposes of Mobile Device Management are to provide mobile data
protection and IT management services.
17. One approach to enterprise data protection in Android is not to allow any of the enterprise
data on the mobile device itself. Rather, the only way to access enterprise information is
using a remote desktop and/or application virtualization.
18. Once we have an approach that prevents software attacks from breaking the sandbox
between protection layers, the embedded device may beneﬁt from taking defense-in-
depth a step further to protect the layered encryption system from physical attacks usingan attached secure element.
19. Layered encryption as a defense-in-depth strategy is a sensible approach to increasing the
assurance of Android-based data protection services; however, what is not sensible is torun both layers within the Android environment itself.
6.6 Bibliography and Notes
1. What is Endpoint Security? http://www.endpointsecurity.org/Documents/What_is_endpointsecurity.pdf .
2. Epstein K, Elgin B. Network Security Breaches Plague NASA .http://www.businessweek.com/print/magazine/
content/08_48/b4110072404167.htm ; November 20, 2008.
3. Bohn K, Todd B. Obama, McCain Campaigns’ Computers Hacked for Policy Data. http://www.cnn.com/2008/
TECH/11/06/campaign.computers.hacked ; November 6, 2008.
4. Greenemeier L. The TJX Effect .http://www.informationweek.com/news/security/cybercrime/showArticle.
jhtml?articleID ¼201400171 ; August 11, 2007.
5. Zetter K. Miley Cyrus Hacker Raided by FBI .http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2008/10/miley-cyrus-hac.
html; October 20, 2008.
6. Kirk J. ‘Evil Twin’ Wi-Fi Access Points Proliferate .http://www.networkworld.com/news/2007/042507-
infosec-evil-twin-wi-ﬁ-access.html ; April 25, 2007.
7. Sotirov A, et al. MD5 Considered Harmful Today .http://www.win.tue.nl/hashclash/rogue-ca ; December 30,
2008.
8. McMillan R. CheckFree Warns 5 Million Customers After Hack .http://csoonline.com/article/474365/
CheckFree_Warns_Million_Customers_After_Hack ; January 7, 2009.
9. Krebs B. Citibank Phish Spoofs 2-Factor Authentication .http://blog.washingtonpost.com/securityﬁx/2006/07/
citibank_phish_spoofs_2factor_1.html ; July 10, 2006.
10. Kristensen T. Symantec Beats the Competition ..http://secunia.com/blog/29 ; October 13, 2008.
11. Skoudis Ed, Carpenter M. Seven Desktop Security Suites Reviewed. Information Security Magazine;
November 2007; http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/magazineContent/Product-review-Seven-integrated-
endpoint-security-products .386 Chapter 6

--- Page 396 ---
12. National Vulnerability Database, search on vendors Symantec. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/search?
execution ¼e2s1
13.McAfee Antivirus Vulnerability Published .http://news.zdnet.co.uk/security/0,1000000189,39191831,00.htm ;
March 18, 2005.
14.http://www.ironkey.com
15. Claburn T. Another Google Chrome Security Flaw Identiﬁed .http://www.informationweek.com/news/internet/
google/showArticle.jhtml?articleID ¼210500290 ; September 5, 2008.
16. King ST, et al. Secure Web Browsing with the OP Web Browser .http://www.cs.uiuc.edu/homes/kingst/
Research_ﬁles/grier08.pdf ; 2008.
17. National Vulnerability Database, search for VMware and/or Xen. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/search?
execution ¼e2s1
18. Schneier B. Two-Factor Authentication: Too Little, Too Late .http://www.schneier.com/essay-083.html ; April
2005.
19. Weigold T, et al. The Zurich Trusted Information Channel dAn Efﬁcient Defence against Man-in-the-Middle
and Malicious Software Attacks; TRUST 2008, LNCS 4968; 2008. 75e 91.
20. Shachtman N. Under Worm Assault, Military Bans Disks, USB Drives .http://blog.wired.com/defense/2008/
11/army-bans-usb-d.html ; November 19, 2008.
21. Security and Permissions in Android. http://code.google.com/android/devel/security.html.
22. Shankland S. Google Details ‘Reboot’ Bug, Android Security Fixes .http://news.cnet.com/8301-1009_3-
10093573-83.html ; November 11, 2008.
23. Burnette Ed. Worst. Bug. Ever .http://blogs.zdnet.com/Burnette/?p ¼680; November 7, 2008.
24. Oberheide J, Lanier Z. TEAM JOCH vs. Android . Washington, DC: Presentation made at ShmooCon 2011
Conference. http://n0where.org/talks/shmoo11-teamjoch_v4.pdf ; January 28-30, 2011.
25. Kroah-Hartman G, et al. Linux Kernel Development: How Fast It Is Going, Who Is Doing It, What They Are
Doing, and Who Is Sponsoring It: An August 2009 Update .http://www.linuxfoundation.org/sites/main/ﬁles/
publications/whowriteslinux.pdf; August 2009.Emerging Applications 387

--- Page 397 ---
Index
A
Access control, 46 e61
capabilities versus, 53 e57.
See also Capabilities
confused deputy problem, 53
granularity versus, 49 e51
Network Access Control (NAC),
359
secure web browser (case study),
47e49
whitelists versus blacklists, 51 e52
Action speciﬁcation, 181
Activity diagrams, 179
Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES), 21, 230
in Counter Mode (AES-CTR), 256
Alexander, Keith B., 16
Amazon Kindle, 371
Analytical Software Design (ASD),
174, 189, 191e194
Android security, 369e380
mobile phone data protection (case
study), 372e373
retrospective, 369e370rooting, 371
sandboxing approaches, 373e380
Anti-malware packages, 52, 356 e357
Apache web server, 119
Application-speciﬁc policies, 21 e22
Applications programming
interface (API), 32 e33
ARINC 653 partition scheduler, 46
ARM Ltd., 70
ARM TrustZone, 71 e73
Asymmetric cryptography, 211.
See also Embedded
cryptography
Asymmetric Multiprocessing (AMP)
approach, 79 e80
Audit log authority, 53
Authenticated encryption, 232 e233CCM mode, 233Galois Counter Mode, 233
Automated teller machines (ATMs),
257
Automotive security, 366e369
B
Barnes & Noble, 371
Barr, Michael, 132
Berkeley Software Distribution
(BSD) UNIX, 39
BIOS, 85 e87
Block ciphers, 228e232Blue Pill project, 73
Blue screens of death (BSOD), 34
Bluetooth Network Encapsulation
Protocol (BNEP), 10
Bootstrapping, 106, 234
BridgePoint models, 195
Broadcast, 295
RF messages, 257security, 324 e330
conﬂictions, 325group TEKs, 326e327
single KEK, 327e328
single TEK, 326
transmission, 325
Broadfoot, Guy, 169Browser security, 357e358
case study, 47 e49
Buffer overﬂow, 140
vulnerability, 48
Buffer underﬂow, 123e124Bump-on-the-handset, 272 e273
Bump-on-the-line, 272
C
C1X, 132 e133
C99 dialect, 132e133Cadillac Seville’s trip computer, 4
Caesar’s cipher, 210Capabilities
versus access control, 53 e57.
See also Access control
conﬁnement and revocation,
58e60
secure design using, 60 e61
Cavium OCTEON, 307CCM mode, 233
CCOPP-OS . See Commercial-off-
the-shelf (COTS)
CENELEC EN 50128, 156
Central Locking System (CLS), 13
Certiﬁcation authority (CA),
241e242, 274
Change management, 101
CheckFree attack, 354 e355
Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode,
231
Message Authentication Code
(CBC-MAC), 231
Cipher feedback (CFB), 225 e226
Cipher Text Auto Key (CTAK) mode .
SeeCipher feedback (CFB)
Cipher text received (CTR), 214e215
Cipher text transmit (CTT), 214Citibusiness, attack on, 355
Class diagrams, 178, 181
Cloud computing, 365
Code generation, 199e200
Coding standards, 107e109
Cold-boot attack, 341
Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS),
284e285
Compartmentalized Operations
Protection Proﬁled Operatingsystems (CCOPP-OS),
160te161t
COTS-for-secret program, 284
Common Criteria, 157e159
Communicating Sequential Processes
(CSP), 193
389

--- Page 398 ---
Communications proxy, 362e363
Component, 171
diagrams, 178
Componentization, 97, 102
Composite structure diagrams, 178
Compositional veriﬁcation, 176, 193
Conferences, 295
Conﬁdentiality, integrity, and
availability (CIA) protectionelements, 18 e19
Conﬁguration management system,
163e164
Conﬁnement domains, 59Confused deputy problem, 53
Console guest hypervisor, 67 e68
Controlled COMSEC Item (CCI),
283e284
Controlled Access Protection Proﬁle
(CAPP), 160te163t, 163
Controller Area Network (CAN), 366Core embedded operating system
security, 34 e46
determinism, impact of, 42 e44
fault recovery, 37guaranteed resources, 38 e41
memory protection, 34 e35
secure scheduling, 45 e46
virtual device drivers, 41 e42
virtual memory, 35 e37
Cortex A15, 70Counter mode, 227e228, 299e300
Galois Counter Mode (GCM), 233
Covert channel, 43 e44
Critical section, 42
Cryptographic certiﬁcations,
277e285
FIPS 140-2 certiﬁcation, 277e280
NSA certiﬁcation, 280 e285
Cryptographic hashes, 245e247
Matyas-Meyer-Oseas (MMO)
algorithm, 247
Secure Hash Algorithm, 246e247
Cryptographic modes, 224e228
cipher feedback, 225e 226
counter mode, 227e228output feedback (OFB), 224
with CFB protection, 226
trafﬁc ﬂow security, 227
Cryptographic subsystem embedment
options, 271e273
Cryptographic synchronization,
222e224Cryptoperiod,
261
Cryptosystem and PKI policy
enforcement, 365
Custom network security protocols,
316e319
Custom ROM, 371CVE-2006-1528, 8
CVE-2009-2692, 7 e11
CVE-2007-0882, 11 e12
Cyrus, Miley, 352
D
Data-at-rest (DAR), 20, 290,
330e342
embedded system, 341
Data encryption solutions, threats to,
340e342
Data Encryption Standard (DES), 230
Datagram Transport Layer Security
(DTLS), 290e291, 315
Datagram Transport Layer Security/
Secure Real-Time TransportProtocol (DTLS-SRTP),
323e324
Data-in-motion (DIM), 20, 290e291
generalized model, 291e295
key agreement, 293
liveness, 293
mutual authentication, 293
Data-in-transit (DIT), 20, 291Data link security, 300
Data Protection Protocols
for embedded systems, 289e347
Defense-indepth (case study),
372e373
Deployment diagrams, 178Desautels, Adriel, 96
Deterministic random bit generator
(DRBG), 248
Development process efﬁciency,
154e156
Development tool security, 104e 107
Differential power analysis (DPA), 21Difﬁe, Whitﬁeld, 233e234
Difﬁe-Hellman algorithm, 240
man-in-the-middle attack on, 241
Digital pathology scanner (case
study), 183e191, 183f
Direct memory access (DMA),
78e79
Discretionary access control (DAC),
47DO-178B, 147DO-178B Level A, 147
Domain charts, 181
Domain Name System (DNS) attacks,
354e 355
Duqu virus (case study), 34
Dynamic code analysis, 138e146
Dynamic link library (DLL), 39, 48,
56e57
Dynamic memory allocation errors,
145e 146
E
EAL4, 159
Easter egg, 104
ECMQV, 245
802.1AE standard, 301
802.1X authenticator device,
298e 299
802.11i data security, 299e300
AES-CCM usage, 299e300
Electronic codebook (ECB) ciphers,
230, 232
Electronic medical records (EMRs),
15
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC),
235e 236, 244e245, 365.
See also Embedded
cryptography
Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman
(ECDH), 245
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm (ECDSA), 243
Elliptic Curve Qu-Vanstone (ECQV),
243
Embedded C++, 115e116
Embedded C Coding Standard , 132
Embedded cryptography
authenticated encryption, 232 e233
block ciphers, 228e232certiﬁcations, 277e285
cryptographic hashes, 245e247
cryptographic modes, 224e228elliptic curve cryptography,
235e 236, 244e245, 365
key agreement, 239e241
key management, 256e277
Message Authentication Codes,
248
one-time pad, 213e224public key authentication,
241e 243390 Index

--- Page 399 ---
public key cryptography, 233 e239
random number generation,
248e 256
U.S. government cryptographic
guidance, 211e212
Embedded Linux (case study),
6e12. See also Linux
CVE-2009-2692, 8 e11
in government systems, 6 e7
rate of change, 7 e8
Embedded security trends, 4 e17
Embedded network transactions,
350e 365
anatomy of, 351
insecurity state, 351e 352
modern security approaches,
355e 362
network-based transaction threats,
352e 355
trustworthy embedded transaction
architecture, 362e365
Embedded system, 2 e4.See also
individual entries
antithesis of, 2broadcast security, 324e330
complexity, 4 e12
for critical infrastructure,
14e15
data-at-rest protocols,
330e 342
within modern commercial
aircraft, 3f
network connectivity, 12 e14
OpenSSL , 119, 310e311
overview of, 290e291
processor consolidation, 16 e17
sophisticated attackers, 15 e16
storage encryption, 334e 340
within typical automobile, 3f
Emerging applications, 349e387
Android security, 369e380automotive security, 366e369
embedded network transactions,
350e 365
nex
t-generation software-deﬁned
radio, 380e384
Emulation, 75 e76
Encapsulating Security Payload
(ESP), 304
Encrypted storage, 290
End-to-end network transaction
security, 364Enigma cipher, 210Environment sandboxing, 65
Ethernet security protocols,
297e301
Eavesdroppers, 215, 223e224, 260,
318
Exclusive eor (XOR) function, 214,
214t
Executable models, 174e177
Executable UML, 181e182
Extensible Authentication Protocol
(EAP), 299e300
F
F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, 4FALLTHRU comment, 131
Fault recovery, 37Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), ﬂight system
accessibility concerns, 14
Federal Information Processing
Standards Publication (FIPS
PUBS), 211
Field-programmable gate array
(FPGA), 83 e84
FIPS 140-2 certiﬁcation, 277e280FlexRay, 366
Flow-through versus lookaside,
307
Fork bomb, 39
Formal veriﬁcation, 174
G
Galois Counter Mode (GCM), 233Generalized phone communications
(case study), 270e 277
Generalized point-to-point secure
data-in-motion protocol, 292f
General Motors, 12General-purpose desktop operating
systems, memory protectionin, 98
GnuTLS, 311e313
IPv4 code fragments, 312
Government-off-the-shelf (GOTS)
products, 283
GOTS-for-secret certiﬁcation, 283
Green Hills standard mode, 128e131
Group TEKs, 326e327
Guard pages, 35 e36
GUI frameworks, 194H
Hainan Island Incident, 262Handwritten code/legacy code,
merging of, 199e200
Hash, 245
cryptographic hashes, 245e 247
Hellman, Martin, 233e234, 240e241
High-assurance development
processes, 157
High-Assurance Internet Protocol
Encryptor (HAIPE), 310
High-assurance web server (HAWS),
96
case study, 165e169
component architecture, 168independent expert validation,
169
least privilege, 168e169
minimal implementation,
166e168
secure development process, 169
High-Deﬁnition Content Protection
(HDCP) keys, 259
High-level generalized model of point-
to-point secure communication
subsystem, 291f
HMAC_DRBG, 255e256
Hopcroft, Philippa, 169
Human-machine interface (HMI),
381e382
Hypervisor
architectures, 63 e64, 66 e69, 358
console guest hypervisor, 67 e68
microkernel-based hypervisor,
68e69
monolithic hypervisor, 66 e67
security, 73 e74
Blue Pill project, 73
Ormandy’s project, 73
SubVirt project, 73
VMware virtualization, 74
Xen Owning trilogy, 73 e74
I
IBM Rational Rhapsody, 194IEC 61508 standard, 156e157
IEEE 802.1X entities architecture,
298f
IKE v1, 306
IKE v2, 290 e291
Image-processing algorithms, 186Index 391

--- Page 400 ---
Implemented interface model, 193
Implicit certiﬁcates, 243
Independent expert validation,
156e165
Common Criteria, 157e159
operating system protection
proﬁles (case study),160e165
Information ﬂow control, 20Information Security Magazine , 356
InformationWeek , 352
Integrate tool, 60 e61
INTEGRITY-178B operating system,
164
Intel Architecture processors, 2, 307Intel VT, 64, 70
Interaction diagrams, 179
Inter-module static analysis, 118f
Internal-electronic threats, 368e369
Internet, 299
Internet Key Exchange, 305
Internet Protocol (IP)-based network
security, 291
Inter-process communications (IPC),
32e33, 54
Interrupt service routine (ISR),
78e79
I/O virtualization, 74 e80
emulation, 75 e76
IOMMUs, 76 e77
shared IOMMU, 78and virtual device drivers,
78e79
pass-through model, 76 e78
secure I/O virtualization within
microkernels, 79 e80
shared I/O, need for, 75
IPsec, 295
Authentication Header (AH), 304
CPU, 306
eavesdroppers, 318
Encapsulating Security Payload
(ESP), 304
ﬂow-through versus lookaside, 307
integrated and bump-in-the-stack,
303
RFCs, 303e305
and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL),
301
for very low power devices,
307e310
ISO/IEC 1540 . See Common CriteriaIsolation, 19 e20
IV of the receiver (IVR), 220
IV of the transmitter (IVT), 220
J
Jailbreaking . See Rooting
JPEG process, 49
K
Key agreement algorithm, 239e241
Key Auto Key (KAK) . See Output
feedback
Key distribution center (KDC), 275
Key Encryption Key (KEK), 260
single KEK, 327e328
Key escrow, 339e340
Key management, for embedded
systems, 256e277
case studies, 264e277
generalized model, 258e264
Walker spy case, 257e 258
Key Management Infrastructure
(KMI), 284
Keystream-based cryptosystem,
218e219, 219f
Keystream generator, 218f, 219fKroah-Hartman, Greg, 7 e8
L
Labeled Security Protection Proﬁle
(LSPP), 160te161t
LabVIEW platform, 186
Language standards, 127e128
Least privilege, 100, 168 e169
Libcrypto, 311
Libssl, 311
Liedtke, Jochen, 33
Lint, 132
Linux, 361
embedded Linux (case study),
6e12
software-deﬁned radio, 382e383vulnerability, 370
Liveness, in DIM, 293Local Interconnect Network (LIN),
366
Local-physical threats, 366 e368
Location obfuscation, 36 e37
Long Cycle Mode (LCM) .
SeeCounter mode
Loop key generators (LKGs), 275M
Malware attacks, 353 e354
Mandatory access control (MAC), 47Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks,
352e 353, 358e359
Many eyes theory, 6
The MathWorks Inc., 186e187
MATLAB, 186
Matyas-Meyer-Oseas (MMO),
247
Media Oriented Systems Transport
(MOST), 366
Memory allocation model,
199e 200
Memory footprint, 199e200
Memory leaks, 143 e145
Memory management unit (MMU),
72
Memory protection, 34 e35
“MemoryRegion Libfoo.so” box,
60e61
Mentor Graphics BridgePoint, 175,
195
Message Authentication Code
(MAC), 231, 248
Meta-partitioning, 116
Microkernel, 32
hypervisor, 68 e69
versus monolith, 31 e34
Duqu virus (case study), 34
Type-1 hypervisor, 378
Mixed criticality embedded system,
17, 17f
MLS Resource Manager (case study),
55e57
Mobile Device Management (MDM),
369, 375
Mobile phone data protection (case
study), 372e373
Mobile transaction number (mTAN),
359e 360
Model-driven design (MDD),
169e 202
digital pathology scanner (case
study), 183e191
executable models, 174e177
modeling languages, 177e182
platforms types, 182e183
potential beneﬁts of, 173e174
in safety- and security-critical
systems, 201e202
selection of, 191e201392 Index

--- Page 401 ---
trends driving adoption of,
170e 172
Modiﬁed condition/decision coverage
(MC/DC) testing, 107,
147e 154
Monolithic hypervisor, 66 e67
and microkernel, 31 e34
Motion control and dynamic system
modeling, 186e187
Motor Industry Software Reliability
Association (MISRA), 109
MISRA C:2004 and MISRA
C++:2008 (case study),
109e 110
Motorola Atrix Android smartphone,
374
MP944, 4Multi-boot concept, 373e374
Multi-domain radio, 383e384Multilevel Operating Systems
(MLOS), in medium robust-ness environments, 160t e161t
Multi-level secure, 55Multiple condition coverage, 149
Multiple independent levels of
security (MILS), 27 e31
always invoked, 29
damage limitation, 28
data isolation, 27
evaluatable, 29 e31
information ﬂow, 27periods processing, 28 e29
separation kernels, 382 e383
tamper proof, 29virtualization, 16, 383e384
Mutual authentication, in DIM, 293
N
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), 306
AES key wrap algorithm, 232
Special Publication 800-90,
255e 256
National Instruments Corp., 186
National Vulnerability Database
(NVD), 7
Netragard, 96
Netrino embedded C coding standard
(case study), 132e138
Network Access Control (NAC), 359
Network-based transaction threats,
352e 355combinations of attacks, 355malware attacks, 353e354
man-in-the-middle and/or
eavesdropping, 352e353
modern attempts for security,
355e362
anti-malware, 356e357
browser security, 357 e358
network access control, 359secondary device veriﬁcation,
359e360
two-factor authentication,
358e359
virtualized web client, 361
Zone Trusted Information
Channel, 360 e361
pharming attacks, 354e355
phishing and other social
engineering attacks, 353
web application attacks, 354
Network connectivity, 12 e14
Network File System (NFS), 32 e33
Network security, 290
broadcast security, 324e330
choice, 296cryptography, 319. See also
Embedded cryptography
key management approaches, 297
lowest available choice, 296e297
storage layer choice, 332e334
Network Solutions, 354 e355
Next-generation software-deﬁned
radio, 380e384
Linux, 382e383
multi-domain radio, 383e384
red-black separation, 380e381
software-deﬁned radio
architecture, 381
NIST . See National Institute of
Standards and Technology
(NIST)
Non-v
olatile key storage, 262
Nook Color, 371
NULL pointer access, 8 e11,
121e123
O
Object capability . See Capabilities
OCTEON processors, 307One-time pad (OTP), 213e224
One-time retroﬁt cost, 126
One-way functions, 235e236OnStar telematics system, 12 e13
Open source internet security
applications (case study),
119e125
OpenSSH, 316OpenSSL , 119, 310e311
Openswan, 313 e314
OpenVPN, 314
Operating system
protection proﬁles (case study),
160e165
assurance leveling, 164e165
conﬁguration management,
163e164
functional speciﬁcation, 164
role of, 26 e27
services, 20
Ormandy, Tavis, 8, 73Out-of-band transaction veriﬁcation,
359e360
Output feedback (OFB), 224
with CFB protection, 226
Over-the-air rekey (OTAR), 268e269
P
Package diagrams, 178Paravirtualization, 69
Partition scheduling, 45
Peer reviews, 101e104
Pharming attacks, 354e355
PHASE . See Principles of
high-assurance softwareengineering (PHASE)
Phishing attacks, 353Physical security policies, 21
PJFS, 96Plain old telephone service (POTS),
270
Plain text receive (PTR),
214e215
Plain text transmit (PTT), 214
Point-to-multipoint communication,
295
Point-to-point communication,
291e295
Power Architecture governance body,
70
Preboot authentication, 341
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 241e242
Principles of high-assurance software
engineering (PHASE),94e95, 157, 368Index 393

--- Page 402 ---
Private receiver key (PRK), 235
Privilege escalation, 53
Processes, 35
versus threads, 99
Processor consolidation, 16 e17
Proto_ops structure, Linux, 8
Pseudo-random number generation
(PRNG), 248, 254 e256
Public key (PK), 235
authentication, 241e243certiﬁcate, 241e242
cryptography, 233e239. See also
Embedded cryptography
equivalent key strength,
236e237
RSA, 236
trapdoor construction, 238e239
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
project, 284
Q
QorIQ processors, 307
R
Racoon2, 313e314Random keystream, 217 e219, 218f
Random number generation (RNG),
248e256
pseudo-random number
generation, 254e256
true random number generation,
249e254
Rational Rhapsody products, 175Ready, Jim, 8
Real-time embedded system, 42Real-time microkernel, 378
Real-time operating system (RTOS),
42
Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP),
322e323
Red-black architecture,
software-deﬁned radio,380e381
Red keys, 256e257Remote key provisioning, 339
Remote management, 80 e83
security implications, 81 e83
Remote threats, 368
Remoting, 376, 376f
Re-seed operation, 255
Revocation, 264Rhapsody, 194
Ring oscillator-based randomizer
(case study), 250e254
Rlimit, 39
Role-based access control (RBAC)
policy, 21 e22
Root certiﬁcate, 241e242
Rooting (Anroid security), 371
RSA’s SecurID, 358
Runtime componentization, 98 e99
S
Safety Critical Application
Development Environment(SCADE), 195e 196
Safety-, security-, and
mission-critical domains,
MDD in, 201e202
Sandboxing approaches, 373e380
environment sandboxing, 65
mobile device management
encrypted containers,375e376
multi-boot, 373e374physical security, 379e380
remoting, 376sandboxes built on sand, 377
separate hardware, 373
type-1 hypervisor, 377e378
type-2 hypervisor, 376e377
webtop, 374e375
Schneier, Bruce, 359
Secondary device veriﬁcation,
359e360
Secure boot, 84
problems, 371
Secure Communications
Interoperability Protocol(SCIP), 320
Secure development process,
100e156
change management, 101development process efﬁciency,
154e156
development tool security,
104e107
peer reviews, 101e104
secure coding, 107e146
software testing and veriﬁcation,
146e154
Secure dial, 270Secure elements, 263Secure embedded software
development, 93 e208
component architecture, 96 e99
high-assurance web server
(HAWS) (case study),
165e 169
independent expert validation,
156e 165
least privilege, 100minimal implementation, 95 e96
model-driven design (MDD),
169e 202
principles of high-assurance
software engineering
(PHASE), 94 e95
secure development process,
100e 156
Secure
Hash Algorithm (SHA)-1,
246e 247
Secure multimedia protocols, 320
multimedia transport protocols,
322e 324
SCIP, 320
signaling protocols, 321e322
Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol
(SRTP), 322e323
Secure scheduling, 45 e46
Secure Shell (SSH) protocol,
227, 315
additional protocols based on, 316
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 119,
301, 310
SecurID system, 359
Security, 1 e2
assurance, 29policies, 18 e22
application-speciﬁc policies,
21e22
conﬁdentiality, integrity, and
availability (CIA) protection
elements, 18 e19
information ﬂow control, 20isolation, 19 e20
perfect security, 18physical security policies, 21
threats, 22 e23
VxWorks debug port
vulnerability (case study),22e23
Security-Enhanced Linux
(SELinux), 6394 Index

--- Page 403 ---
Security-oriented peer review,
103e 104
Self-hosting compilers, 106
Sendmail , 119e120
Separation Kernel in High
Robustness Environments
(SKPP), 160te161t,
161e 162, 162te163t, 163
Sequence-based speciﬁcation (SBS),
189e 190
Shannon, Claude, 213Side channel, 43
Simulink, 187
Single-bit error extension, 223
Single key encryption key (KEK),
327e 328
and group TEK, 329e330
per receiver, 328e329
Single Level Operating Systems
(SLOS), in medium
robustness environments,
160te 161t
Single-threaded execution model
(STM), 193e194
Single trafﬁc encryption key (TEK),
326
Smart grid, 4, 5f, 14Smart meter, 297
Social engineering attacks, 353
Software as a Service (SaaS), 365
Software assurance, 95
Software Communications
Architecture (SCA), 381
Software-deﬁned radio (SDR),
380e 384. See also
Next-generationsoftware-deﬁned radio
architecture, 380 e381
Software Design Automation (SDA)
platform, 191
Software testing and veriﬁcation,
146e 154
Solaris, 11 e12
Sophisticated attacks/attackers,
15e16, 103e 104
Source code analyzer, 121Spaghetti code, 95
Spoofed message attack, 223e224
Stack overﬂow, 142e 143
Standard execution model (SEM),
193
State-chart diagrams, 179, 181Static root of trust, 85Static source code analysis, 117e126
Storage encryption, 334e340
Storage Key (SK), 260e 261
Stuxnet,
15e16, 16f
Subsystem, 171SubVirt project, 73
Suite B cryptography, 212, 243
Suite B-compliant commercial PKI,
284
Suite B Guidance, 212
Supersession key change, 261
Supervisory machine control layer
software, 187e191
Symmetric cryptography, 211.
See also Embedded
cryptography
Symmetric encryption algorithm
selection, 334e338
advanced threats, 340e342change in password, 339
key derivation function,
338
tweakable ciphers, 335
unattended embedded systems, 339
user authentication approach, 339
XTS-AES, 336e338
System modeling language (SysML),
180e181
versus UML, 180e181
Systems-on-Chip (SoCs), 62
Systems software considerations,
25e91
access control and capabilities,
46e61
core embedded operating system
security requirements, 34 e46
environment sandboxing, 65hypervisor
architectures, 66 e69
security, 73 e74
I/O virtualization, 74 e80
leveraging hardware assists for
virtualization, 70 e73
microkernel versus monolith,
31e34
multiple independent levels of
security (MILS), 27 e31
operating system, role of, 26 e27
paravirtualization, 69remote management, 80 e83
system virtualization, 61 e74Trusted Computing Base (TCB),
assuring integrity of,
83e88
virtual security appliances, 65 e66
System virtualization, 61 e74
applications of, 65
T
Tailored organizational embedded
coding standard, 126
Tanenbaum, Andrew, 33
TEMPEST, 21
Testing and veriﬁcation, 146e154
Thompson Hack (case study),
105e107
Threads/threading
versus processes, 99and runtime execution model,
199e200
Tinnes, Julien, 8
Torvalds, Linus, 33
Trafﬁc Encryption Key (TEK), 260,
274
group TEKs, 326e327
single TEK, 326
Trafﬁc ﬂow security (TFS), 227Transaction veriﬁer, 363e365
Transmission security, 227
Transmission Security Key (TSK),
260
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 119,
290e291, 310, 365
Trapdoor
construction of, 238e239
function of, 236
Trojan, 105
True random number generator
(TRNG), 248e254
Trusted Computing Base (TCB), 31,
49e50
remote attestation, 87 e88
secure boot, 84static versus dynamic root of trust,
84e87
trusted hardware and supply chain,
83e84
Trusted Computing Group (TCG),
85e87
Trusted Execution Technology
(TXT), 85 e87
Trusted Network Connect
(TNC), 87Index 395

--- Page 404 ---
Trusted Platform Module
(TPM), 362
Trustworthy embedded transaction
architecture, 362e365
communications proxy,
362e363
cryptosystem and PKI policy
enforcement, 365
transaction veriﬁer, 363e365
TrustZone, 71 e72
TrustZone-enabled SoCs, 72 e73
Tweakable ciphers, 335
Two-factor authentication,
358e359
Type-1 hypervisor, 66, 377e378
Type-2 hypervisor, 66, 376e377
U
Uniﬁed INFOSEC Criteria (UIC),
281e282
Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML),
178e180
executable, 181e182
United States National Security
Agency (NSA), 242
certiﬁcation, 280e 285
cryptographic interoperability
strategy, 283 e285
cryptographic product
classiﬁcation, 280 e281
cryptographic requirements for
Type 1 devices, 281e283
Suite B cryptography, 212, 243.
See also Embedded
cryptography
Suite B Guidance, 319
UNIX
Berkeley Software Distribution
(BSD), 39
compatible ﬁle system, 39 e40
login program, 105modiﬁed condition/decision
coverage (MC/DC)validation, 107
U.S. CERT National Vulnerability
Database, 370
U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (U.S. CERT)
National Vulnerability
Used interface models, 193U.S. Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), 14
U.S. government cryptographic
guidance, 211e212
U.S. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST),211e212
Use-case diagrams, 179
V
Vehicular security threats and
mitigations, 366e369
internal-electronic, 368e369
local-physical, 366e368
remote, 368
Vendor-speciﬁc modeling languages,
177
Veriﬁcation, deﬁnition of, 171Veriﬁcation sprite, 363
Vernan, Gilbert, 213e224
Virtual device drivers, 41 e42
Virtualization, 361
leveraging hardware assists for,
70e73
Virtualization Technology for x86
(VT-x), 70
Virtualized web client, 361
Virtual machines, 63 e64
Virtual memory, 35 e37
Virtual private network (VPN), 299
Virtual security appliances, 65 e66
VMware, 358VMware virtualization, 30, 74
Voice over IP (VoIP), 320
VxWorks
debug port vulnerability (case
study), 22 e23
remote management, 81
W
Walker, John Anthony Jr., 257
Walker Spy Case (case study),
257e 258
Web application attacks, 354
Web browser, secured . See Browser
security
Webtop concept, 374e375
Whitelists versus blacklists,
51e52
Wi-Fi, 297
Wi-Fi Alliance, 300
WPA2, 299e300
Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2),
299e 300
Wireless networks
data link security, 300
Work function, for ciphers, 222, 222t
Worst-case execution times (WCET),
42, 44
WPA2 . See Wi-Fi Protected Access 2
(WPA2)
X
X.509 certiﬁcates, 242
Xen, 73 e74, 358
XTS-AES, 336e338XtUML model, 181e182
Z
ZigBee-based smart meter, 297Zone Trusted Information Channel
(ZTIC), 360e361396 Index
