
--- Page 1 (No text found) ---

--- Page 2 ---
Patterns for time-triggered embedded systemswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 3 ---
ACM PRESS BOOKS
This book is published as part of the ACM Press Books – a collaboration between the
Association for Computing Machinery and Addison-Wesley. ACM is the oldest andlargest education and scientific society in the information technology field. Throughits high-quality publications and services, ACM is a major force in advancing the skillsand knowledge of IT professionals throughout the world. For further informationabout ACM contact:
ACM Member Services ACM European Service Center
1515 Broadway, 17th Floor 108 Cowley RoadNew York NY 10036-5701 Oxford OX4 1JFPhone: +1 212 626 0500 United KingdomFax: +1 212 944 1318 Phone: +44 1865 382338Email: acmhelp@acm.org Fax: +44 1865 381338
Email: acm-europe@acm.orgURL: http://www.acm.org
SELECTED ACM TITLES:
Software Requirements and Specification: A Lexicon of Software Practice, Principles
and Prejudices   Michael Jackson
Software Test Automation: Effective Use of Text Execution Tools   Mark Fewster and
Dorothy Graham
Test Process Improvement: A Practical Step-by-step Guide to Structured Testing
Tim Koomen and Martin Pol
Mastering the Requirements Process   Suzanne Robertson and James Robertson
Bringing Design to Software: Expanding Software Development to Include Design
Terry Winograd, John Bennett, Laura de Young, Bradley Hartfield
Software for Use: A Practical Guide to the Models and Methods of Usage Centered
Design   Larry L. Constantine and Lucy A. D. Lockwood
Problem Frames: Analyzing and Structuring Software Development Problems   
Michael Jackson
Software Blueprints: Lightweight Uses of Logic in Conceptual Modelling   
David Robertson and Jaume Agustiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 4 ---
Patterns for time-triggered
embedded systems
Building reliable applications with 
the 8051 family of microcontrollers
Michael J. Pont
The Keil compiler (demo) and associated files on the CD-ROM enclosed
with this book have been authored and developed by Keil (UK) Ltd.© Keil (UK) Ltd 2001.
acmacm
PRESS
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 5 ---
PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED
Head Office: London Office:
Edinburgh Gate 128 Long AcreHarlow CM20 2JE London WC2E 9ANTel: +44 (0)1279 623623 Tel: +44 (0)20 7447 2000Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059 Fax: +44 (0)20 7240 5771
Websites: www.it-minds.com
www.aw.com/cseng/
First published in Great Britain in 2001
© ACM Press 2001ISBN 0 201 33138 1The right of Michael Pont to be identified as Author of this Work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without either the prior written permission of the Publishers or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP. This book may not be lent, resold, hired out orotherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published, without the prior consent of the Publishers.
The programs in this book have been included for their instructional value. The publisher does
not offer any warranties or representations in respect of their fitness for a particular purpose,nor does the publisher accept any liability for any loss or damage arising from their use.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Pearson Education Limited has made everyattempt to supply trademark information about manufacturers and their products mentionedin this book. 
The publishers wish to thank the following for permission to reproduce the material: Arizona
Microchip Technology Ltd; Allegro Microsystems; Atmel Corporation; Infineon; PhilipsSemiconductors; Texas Instruments.
Two of the figures in this book (Figure 3.2 and 3.4) reproduce information provided by Atmel
Corporation. Atmel® warrants that it owns these materials and all intellectual property relatedthereto. Atmel, however, expressly and explicitly excludes all other warranties, insofar as itrelates to this book, including accuracy or applicability of the subject matter of the Atmelmaterials for any purpose.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Applied for.
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
Designed by Claire Brodmann Book Designs, Lichfield, Staffs
Typeset by Pantek Arts Ltd, Maidstone, Kent.Printed and bound in the United States of America.
The Publishers’ policy is to use paper manufactured from sustainable forests.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 6 ---
This book is dedicated to my parents, 
Barbara and Gordon Pontwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 7 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 8 ---
Contents
Foreword    page xiv
Preface    xvi
Introduction 1
1 What is a time-triggered embedded system? 3
1.1 Introduction    3
1.2 Information systems   3
1.3 Desktop systems    5
1.4 Real-time systems    6
1.5 Embedded systems    8
1.6 Event-triggered systems    10
1.7 Time-triggered systems    11
1.8 Conclusions    14
2 Designing embedded systems using patterns 15
2.1 Introduction    15
2.2 Limitations of existing software design techniques    17
2.3 Patterns    22
2.4 Patterns for time-triggered systems    24
2.5 Conclusions    25
Part A Hardware foundations 27
3 The 8051 microcontroller family 29
STANDARD 8051 30
SMALL 8051 41
EXTENDED 8051 46
4 Oscillator hardware 53
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 54
CERAMIC RESONATOR 64www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 9 ---
5 Reset hardware 67
RC RESET 68
ROBUST RESET 77
6 Memory issues 81
ON-CHIP MEMORY 82
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 94
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY 100
7 Driving DC loads 109
NAKED LED 110
NAKED LOAD 115
IC BUFFER 118
BJT DRIVER 124
IC DRIVER 134
MOSFET DRIVER 139
SSR DRIVER (DC)144
8 Driving AC loads 148
EMR DRIVER 149
SSR DRIVER (AC)156
Part B Software foundations 159
9 A rudimentary software architecture 161
SUPER LOOP 162
PROJECT HEADER 169
10 Using the ports 173
PORT I /O174
PORT HEADER 184
11 Delays 193
HARDWARE DELAY 194
SOFTWARE DELAY 206CONTENTS viiiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 10 ---
12 Watchdogs 215
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 217
Part C Time-triggered architectures 
for single-processor systems 229
13 An introduction to schedulers 231
13.1 Introduction    231
13.2 The desktop OS   231
13.3 Assessing the super loop architecture    233
13.4 A better solution    235
13.5 Example: Flashing an LED    239
13.6 Executing multiple tasks at different time intervals    243
13.7 What is a scheduler?    245
13.8 Co-operative and pre-emptive scheduling    246
13.9 A closer look at pre-emptive schedulers    250
13.10 Conclusions    253
14 Co-operative schedulers 254
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 255
15 Learning to think co-operatively 297
LOOP TIMEOUT 298
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 305
16 Task-oriented design 316
MULTI -STAGE TASK 317
MULTI -STATE TASK 322
17 Hybrid schedulers 332
HYBRID SCHEDULER 333
Part D The user interface 359
18 Communicating with PCs via RS-232 361
PC LINK (RS-232) 362CONTENTS ixwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 11 ---
19 Switch interfaces 397
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )399
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )410
ON-OFF SWITCH 414
MULTI -STATE SWITCH 423
20 Keypad interfaces 433
KEYPAD INTERFACE 434
21 Multiplexed LED displays 449
MX LED DISPLAY 450
22 Controlling LCD panels 465
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 467
Part E Using serial peripherals 491
23 Using ‘I2C’ peripherals 493
I2C PERIPHERAL 494
24 Using ‘SPI’ peripherals 520
SPI PERIPHERAL 521
Part F Time-triggered architectures
for multiprocessor systems 537
25 An introduction to shared-clock schedulers 539
25.1 Introduction    539
25.2 Additional CPU performance and hardware facilities    539
25.3 The benefits of modular design    541
25.4 How do we link more than one processor    543
25.5 Why additional processors may not always improve reliability    550
25.6 Conclusions    552CONTENTS xwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 12 ---
26 Shared-clock schedulers using external interrupts 553
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)554
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )593
27 Shared-clock schedulers using the UART 608
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )609
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) 642
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 646
28 Shared-clock schedulers using CAN 675
SCC SCHEDULER 677
29 Designing multiprocessor applications 711
DATA UNION 712
LONG TASK 716
DOMINO TASK 720
Part G Monitoring and control components 725
30 Pulse-rate sensing 727
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT 728
SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT 736
31 Pulse-rate modulation 741
HARDWARE PRM 742
SOFTWARE PRM 748
32 Using analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs) 756
ONE-SHOT ADC 757
ADC PRE -AMP 777
SEQUENTIAL ADC 782
A-A FILTER 794
CURRENT SENSOR 802
33 Pulse-width modulation 807
HARDWARE PWM 808CONTENTS xiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 13 ---
PWM SMOOTHER 818
3-LEVEL PWM 822
SOFTWARE PWM 831
34 Using digital-to-analog converters (DACs) 840
DAC OUTPUT 841
DAC SMOOTHER 853
DAC DRIVER 857
35 Taking control 860
PID CONTROLLER 861
Part H Specialized time-triggered architectures 891
36 Reducing the system overheads 893
255- TICK SCHEDULER 894
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 911
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 919
37 Increasing the stability of the scheduling 931
STABLE SCHEDULER 932
Conclusions 941
38 What this book has tried to do 941
38.1 Introduction    943
38.2 What this book has tried to do    943
38.3 Conclusions    943
39 Collected references and bibliography 946
39.1 Complete list of publications    946
39.2 Other pattern collections    952
39.3 Design techniques for real-time/embedded systems    952
39.4 Design techniques for high-reliability systems    953
39.5 The 8051 microcontroller    954
39.6 Related publications by the author    954CONTENTS xiiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 14 ---
Appendices 955
A The design notation and CASE tool 957
Overview    957
The CASE tool    957
The notation    957
B Guide to the CD 980
Overview    980
The basis of the CD    980
The source code for this book    980
C Guide to the WWW site 982
Overview    982
The URL    982
Contents of the WWW site    982
Bug reports and code updates    982
Index    985CONTENTS xiiiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 15 ---
Foreword
You hold in your hands a pattern language. If you could measure its distance from the
topics of my patterns, you would find a sizeable gap. In spirit, however, Michael isright on target.
Ward Cunningham and I worked during the early days of the commercialization of
Smalltalk. Smalltalk had been designed from the beginning to be a seamless environ-ment. You could be using a word processor written in Smalltalk, start up a debugger,modify the program and continue typing.
Some of the first Tektronix customers for Smalltalk were pretty odd. We often
talked about Ray, an old guy from a big chemical company who latched ontoSmalltalk and really made it jump and run, presenting and manipulating experimen-tal data. Watching one of his demos was a delight, because he was so proud of whathe had accomplished.
Reading Ray’s code was another matter entirely. He would do anything and every-
thing, no matter how hideous, to get his programs to work. The result was a mess thatwas totally unmaintainable and only used a fraction of the power of Smalltalk.
We often used Ray as the personification of the audience we wanted for our software
– people who have problems to solve and have to construct software to solve them. Wecould easily contrast this utilitarian attitude with our ‘no compromise engineering’ atti-tude towards software, where the simplicity and elegance of the solution were moreimportant than the problem solved. We could see that if we wanted to affect the world,we couldn’t just pursue our visions of beauty, we would have to try to help Ray at thesame time.
The resulting pattern language was a curious blend of high-minded advice (‘never
use a computer you can’t personally turn off’) and banal bookkeeping chores (‘havethe braces in your source code form rectangles’). The intent was to help Ray get moreout of Smalltalk. In this we largely failed. Looking at my career since then, I have drift-ed more and more to giving advice to people coaching people who write programs forpeople who write programs for...
That’s why I loved reading Michael’s early draft. It brought back that feeling of
opening up a field of endeavour to someone who just has a problem to solve and whodoesn’t want to be an expert in the solution. Now I’m Ray. I’d love to whip togetherlittle microcontrollers to solve various problems (okay, so I’m a nerd). Reading this pat-tern language gives me the confidence that I could do just that.
Far from just giving me the smell of rosin in my nose and the feel of a wire wrap gun
in my hand, these patterns stand as an example of how much more can be done withpatterns than is commonly attempted. Patterns at their best bridge the gap betweenwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 16 ---
problem and solution. They connect human needs and emotions with technology. And
they open up new possibilities for people who just have a problem to solve.
Fire up your soldering iron and enjoy.
Kent Beck
Three Rivers InstituteMerlin, OregonFOREWORD xvwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 17 ---
Embedded software is ubiquitous. It forms a core component of an enormous range of
systems, from aircraft, passenger cars and medical equipment, to children’s toys, videorecorders and microwave ovens. This book provides a complete and coherent set ofsoftware patterns to support the development of this type of application.
The remainder of this preface attempts to provide answers to more detailed ques-
tions which prospective readers may have about the contents.
I What are the key features of this book?
GThe focus is on the rapid development of software for time-triggered, embedded sys-tems, using software patterns. The meaning of ‘time triggered’ is explained inChapter 1; software patterns are introduced in Chapter 2. 
GThe systems are all based on microcontrollers, from the widely used 8051 family.This vast family of 8-bit devices is manufactured by a number of companies, includ-ing Philips, Infineon, Atmel, Dallas, Texas Instruments and Intel. The range of dif-ferent 8051 microcontrollers available is reviewed in Chapter 3.
GTime-triggered techniques are the usual choice in safety-related applications, wherereliability is a crucial design requirement. However, the need for reliability is notrestricted to systems such as drive-by-wire passenger cars, aerospace systems ormonitoring systems for industrial robots: even at the lowest level, an alarm clockthat fails to sound on time or a video recorder that operates intermittently may nothave safety implications but, equally, will not have high sales figures. The patternspresented here allow time-triggered techniques to be simply and cost-effectivelyapplied in virtually any embedded project.
GThe applications discussed in detail must carry out tasks or respond to events overtime intervals measured in milliseconds. This level of response can be economical-ly and reliably achieved, even with an 8-bit microcontroller, using the approachesdiscussed in this book.
GThe software is implemented entirely in ‘C’. All of the examples in the book appear,in full, on the enclosed CD.
GThe book is supported by a WWW site which includes, among other features, a widerange of detailed case studies, additional technical information and links to sourcesof further information 
(http://www.engg.le.ac.uk/books/Pont).Prefacewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 18 ---
PREFACE xvii
II How do you build time-triggered embedded systems?
GThe time-triggered systems in this book are created using schedulers. Briefly, a
scheduler is a very simple ‘operating system’ suitable for use in embedded applica-tions (see Chapter 13 for a detailed introduction to this topic).
GA range of complete scheduler architectures for applications involving a singlemicrocontroller is described and illustrated (Chapters 14 to 17). Complete sourcecode for a number of different schedulers is included on the CD.
GLike an increasing number of applications, many of the systems presented hereinvolve the use of more than one microcontroller: a range of shared-clockscheduler architectures that can support this type of application is described(Chapters 25 to 29). Many of these systems make use of popular serial standards,including the CAN bus and RS-485.
GA selection of more specialized scheduler architectures is also presented (in Part H).This includes a ‘stable’ scheduler that can provide very precise timing over longperiods, a scheduler optimized to run a single task and general-purpose schedulersdesigned for low-power and/or low-memory applications (see Chapters 36 and 37).
III What other topics are discussed in the book?
GAll embedded systems involve some hardware design and suitable hardware foun-dations are presented. These include designs for oscillator and reset circuits andtechniques for connecting external ROM and RAM memory (see Chapters 4, 5 and6). These also include interface circuits suitable for use with low- and high-voltageDC and AC loads (see Chapters 7 and 8).
GSuitable software foundations are also presented, including a simple architecture forembedded applications (Chapter 9), techniques for controlling port pins (Chapter10), techniques for generating delays (Chapter 11) and techniques for using watch-dog timers (Chapter 12).
GA key part of the user interface of some embedded applications is an RS-232 link toa desktop or notebook PC, while many other embedded systems have a user inter-face created using an LCD or LED display along with a small collection of switchesand/or a keypad. Techniques for working with these different interface componentsare presented in Chapters 18 to 22.
GMany modern different peripheral devices (LCDs, LED displays, EEPROMs, A-D andD-A devices and so on) now have a serial interface, with the result that these devicescan be connected to a microcontroller without consuming large numbers of portpins. Complete software libraries for the two main serial communication protocols(I
2C and SPI) are presented in Chapters 23 and 24.
GTechniques suitable for use in condition monitoring and control applications arepresented in Part G. This includes a discussion of ‘PID control’. Again, detailed codelibraries are provided (Chapter 30 to Chapter 35).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 19 ---
IV Who should read this book?
I had three main groups of people in mind as I wrote this book:
GSoftware engineers with previous experience of desktop systems now beginning to
work with embedded systems.
GHardware engineers who wish to understand more about the software issuesinvolved in the development of embedded systems.
GUniversity and college students on ‘electronic and software engineering’, ‘softwareengineering’, ‘computer science’, ‘electronic engineering’ or similar programmeswho are taking advanced modules in embedded systems.
It must be emphasized that this book is not intended for those requiring an introduc-
tion to programming and it is expected that readers will have previously developed‘desktop’ software applications, using C, C++ or a similar high-level language. Readerswith less experience in this area may find it useful to have a copy of an introductorybook on ‘C’, such as Herbert Schildt’s Teach Yourself C (Schildt, 1997)
1by their side as
they read this book.
Similarly, some familiarity with the principles of software design is assumed. Here,
some experience with ‘object-oriented’ design, and ‘process-oriented’ design (‘struc-tured analysis’) will be useful. Readers with less experience in this area may find it use-ful to have a copy of my previous introductory book on software design (Pont, 1996)by their side.
Finally, some very basic electronics knowledge is also useful. Readers without hard-
ware design experience may find it useful to have available a copy of The Art of
Electronics (Horowitz and Hill, 1989).
V What type of microcontroller hardware is used?
The market for microcontrollers is vast. Most current estimates suggest that, for every
processor sold for a desktop PC, 100 microcontrollers are sold for embedded systems. 
As the sub-title suggests, this book focuses on the 8051 family of microcontrollers,
which was originally developed by Intel, but is now produced, in more than 300 dif-ferent forms, by a wide range of companies, including Philips, Infineon, Atmel andDallas. The use of the 8051 family is no accident. Together, sales of this vast family areestimated to account for more than 50% of the 8-bit microcontroller market and tohave the largest share (around 30%) of the microcontroller market as a whole. PREFACE xviii
In most cases, readers with previous desktop programming experience, some familiarity
with ‘dataflow diagrams’ or ‘UML’ and some rudimentary hardware knowledge will havelittle difficulty with the material presented here. Please note that no knowledge of soft-ware patterns is assumed.
1. Details of sources referred to in the text are given in Chapter 39www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 20 ---
Note that in this book I consider not only recent versions of the ‘standard’ 8051 (4
ports, 40/44 pins: e.g. the Atmel 89C52; Dallas 89C420; Infineon C501; Philips 89CRD2),but the full range of modern devices, including the ‘small’ 8051s (two ports, 20/24 pins:e.g. the Atmel 89C4051; Philips 87LPC764) and the ‘extended’ 8051s (up to ten ports,~100 pins, CAN, ADC, etc. on chip: e.g. Infineon C509; Infineon C515c; Dallas 80c390). 
VI What’s on the CD?
The CD includes complete source code files for all the software patterns: as mentioned
above, allof this code is in the ‘C’ programming language.
The source code for these patterns is fully compatible with the industry-standard Keil
C compiler. An evaluation version of this compiler, and a complete hardware simulator,is also included on the CD: this allows the majority of the patterns to be explored on adesktop PC without the need to purchase or construct any hardware at all.
Finally, data sheets (in PDF format) for a large number of 8051 microcontroller are
also included on the CD.
VII What about the WWW site?
There is a WWW site associated with this book, at the following URL:
http://www.engg.le.ac.uk/books/Pont
On this site you will find:
GA set of detailed case studies describing the application of the techniques discussed
in this book in a series of small and large projects.
GBug reports and code updates (please see section X, which follows).
GFurther code samples.
GLinks to other relevant sites.
VIII Is the code ‘free ware’?
The code included in this book took many years to produce. It is not ‘free ware’ and issubject to some simple copyright restrictions. These are as follows:
GHaving purchased a copy of this book, you are entitled to use the code listed in thisbook and included on the CD in your projects, should you choose to do so. If you usethe code in this way, then no run-time royalties are due. However, I would appreciateit if you acknowledged the source of the code in the product documentation.PREFACE xix
Please note: The code associated with this book is written entirely in ‘C’: you will find it
straightforward to translate the code for use on a different hardware platform should youwish to do so. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 21 ---
GIf there are ten developers in your team using code adapted from this book, please
purchase ten copies of the book.
GYou may not, under any circumstances , publish any of the source code included
in the book or on the CD, in any form or by any means, without explicit writtenauthorization from me. If you wish to publish limited code fragments then, in mostcircumstances, I will grant this permission, subject only to an appropriate acknowl-edgement accompanying the published material. If you wish to publish more sub-stantial code listings, then payment of a fee may be required. Please contact me forfurther details.
IX How should this book be read?
While writing this book, I had two types of reader in mind: those who like to read a bookfrom cover to cover and those who prefer to treat a book like this as a reference source,to be first skim read and then opened, as needed, during the course of a project.
To match the needs of the cover-to-cover readers, the material follows in a logical
order, from the introductory and foundation material, through to more advancedmaterial. To make it easy to read in this way, I have tried to ensure that the delivery ofinformation is as sequential as possible: that is, that the material needed to understand(say) Chapter 14 is presented in Chapters 1 to 13. 
For use as a work of reference, I suggest that readers first read (or at least skim) the
introductory chapters (1 and 2, plus 3, 9, 13 and 25): together, these chapters will pro-vide a good overview of the material presented elsewhere in the book. 
X What about bug reports and code updates?
There is huge amount of code involved in this project, both in the book itself and onthe associated CD. I have personally tested all of the code that appears here.Nonetheless, errors can creep in.
If you think you have found a bug, please first check the WWW site (see earlier sec-
tion VII), to see if anyone else has picked up the error: if they have, a code correctionwill have been made available.
If you have found a bug not listed on the WWW site, please send me an e-mail (the
address is at the end of this preface) and I will do my best to help.
I will be also be pleased to mention anyone who spots a bug in subsequent editions.
XI What about other reader comments?
I began my first 8051 project in 1986 and I have tried to write the book that I neededat this time. Only you can tell me if I have succeeded. PREFACE xxwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 22 ---
I would appreciate your comments and feedback. For example, should the book be
longer? Shorter? What other areas should I cover? What should I miss out? Would youlike to see a future edition focusing on a different family of microcontrollers? If so,which one?
To ensure that any future editions continue to provide the information you need, I
would be delighted to hear of your experiences (good or bad) using the book. I can becontacted either by post (via the publishers, please), or much more efficiently bye-mail at the address given at the end of this Preface.
I’ll do my best to respond personally and promptly to every communication.
XII Credit where credit is due
The material presented here has evolved substantially in the three years since I beganwork on this project. The creation and subsequent development of this material wouldnot have been possible without the help and support of a great many people.
In particular, I would like to thank:
GKent Beck (Three Rivers Institute) for providing the Foreword and introducing meto Ray.
GThe Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and the (then)Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC), which have funded most of myresearch in this area.
GStaff at a range of UK and European organizations who have employed me as a con-sultant and / or attended my training courses in software development over the lastdecade and from whom I – in turn – have learned an enormous amount aboutembedded systems, software design and programming.
GVarious people associated with the EuroPlop (1999) conference:
– Fiona Kinnear (then at Addison-Wesley) for suggesting that I should attend. 
– My ‘shepherd’, Ward Cunningham, for making me revise my submission to take
into account more of the ideas and philosophy of this book: as Ward predicted,the revised version provoked much useful debate. 
– All the people who took the time to comment on my draft patterns: of these peo-
ple, Kent Beck deserves a particular mention as he provided numerous construc-tive comments and general support. 
GThe members of the Midlands Patterns Group for numerous helpful suggestionsand ideas.
GVarious people who have acted as reviewers during the evolution of this text:
– Michael Jackson (University of Wolverhampton) for invaluable comments on my
early ideas for the first version of this book. 
– Chris Hills (Keil Software), Niall Murphy (PanelSoft) and David Ward (The Motor
Industry Research Association), who provided many useful comments on the firstcomplete draft of this book.PREFACE xxiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 23 ---
– Mark Banner (University of Leicester) for providing useful comments on several
of the final draft chapters.
GVarious people at the University of Leicester:
– Members of the ‘Frankenstein’ group for inviting me to give my first talk on
patterns and, through their enthusiasm and feedback, first convincing me thatthe ideas presented here had some validity.
– Royan Ong, who has taught me a great deal about hardware design over the last
two years.
– Dave Dryden and Andy Willby for feedback on my hardware designs.– Andrew Norman, for creating the first version of the SPI library in Chapter 24
and – more generally – for finding numerous ‘features’ in my designs and codesince 1992.
– James Andrew, Adrian Banks, Mark Banner, Mathew Hubbard, Andrei Lesiapeto,
Hitesh Mistry, Alastair Moir, Royan Ong, Chinmay Parikh, Keiron Skillett, RobertSmith, Thomas Sorrel, and Neil Whitworth, for destructive testing of many of thecode examples.
– The people who ‘saved my life’ when my computer went up in smoke in March
2000, when the first draft of this book was (over)due at the publishers, in partic-ular Andy Willby and Jason Palmer.
– Other members of staff for help and advice during the course of this project,
including Declan Bates, Dave Dryden, Chris Edwards, Ian Jarvis, FernandoSchlindwein and Maureen Strange.
– Ian Postlethwaite, for allowing me time to complete this large project.
GBob Damper (University of Southampton) who introduced me to the challenges ofspeech recognition using the 8051 family in the mid-1980s.
GPeople at Keil Software:
– Reinhard Keil, for his support and for providing an updated CD at the last minute.
– Chris Hills, for much useful advice.
GThe members of various e-mail pattern and microcontroller lists for numerous help-ful comments and suggestions.
GVarious people at Addison-Wesley Longman and Pearson Education:
– Sally Mortimore (then of AWL) for letting me constantly change my mind about
the contents of this book.
– Alison Birtwell for stepping courageously into Sally’s shoes when Sally could take
it no longer.
– Katherin Ekstrom for answering all my e-mails.– Penelope Allport, for smooth management of the final production process.– Helen Baxter, for careful copy editing.– George Moore, for proof reading the final, vast, document.– Isobel McLean, for the index.– Everyone at Pantek, for the typesetting.PREFACE xxiiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 24 ---
GGordon Pont and Andrew Pont for proof reading.
GLast, but not least:
– Sarah, for supporting me throughout the last three years.
– Fiona, Mark, Siobhan and Clare, for teaching me how to fly kites.– Anna, Nick and Ella, for numerous Friday nights.– Lisa and Mike, for Tuscany.– Cass and Kynall Washington, for always being there.– Radiohead, for keeping me sane.
Michael J. Pont
Great Dalby, May 2001
M.Pont@leicester.ac.ukPREFACE xxiiiwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 25 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 26 ---
Introduction
The chapters in this introductory section are intended to answer the following questions:
GWhat is an embedded system?
GWhat is a time-triggered system and what are the alternatives?
GWhy are time-triggered systems generally considered to be more reliable than
systems based on different architectures?
G What is a software pattern?
G How can patterns assist in the creation of reliable embedded applications?www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 27 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 28 ---
What is a time-triggered 
embedded system?
In this introductory chapter, we consider what is meant by the phrases ‘embedded
system’ and ‘time-triggered system’ and we examine how these important areas overlap. 
1.1 Introduction
Current software applications are often given one of a bewildering range of labels:
G Information system
GDesktop application
GReal-time system
G Embedded system
GEvent-triggered system
G Time-triggered system
There is considerable overlap between the various areas. We will therefore briefly con-
sider all six types of application in this chapter, to put our discussions of time-triggeredembedded systems in the remainder of this book in context.
1.2 Information systems
Information systems (ISs), and particularly ‘business information systems’, represent ahuge number of applications. Although many of the challenges of information systemdevelopment are rather different from those we will be concerned with in this book, achapter1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 29 ---
basic understanding of such systems is useful, not least because most of the existing
techniques for real-time and embedded development have been adapted from thoseoriginally developed to support the IS field.
As an example of a basic information system, consider the payroll application illus-
trated schematically in Figure 1.1.
This application will, we assume, be used to print the pay slips for a company, using
employee data provided by the user and stored in the system. The printing of thecheques might take several hours: if a particularly complex set of calculations arerequired at the end of a tax year, and the printing is consequently delayed by a fewminutes, then this is likely to be, at most, inconvenient. We will contrast this ‘incon-venience’ with the potentially devastating impact of delays in a real-time applicationin later examples.
ISs are widely associated with storage and manipulation of large amounts of data
stored in disk files. Implementations in file-friendly languages, such as COBOL, werecommon in the 1960s and 1970s and such systems remain in widespread use, althoughmost such systems are now in a ‘maintenance’ phase and new implementations insuch languages are rare. 
Modern IS implementations make far greater use of relational databases, accessed
and manipulated using the SQL language. Relational database technology is wellproven, safe and built on a formal mathematical foundation. While the design andimplementation of large, reliable, relational database systems is by no means a trivialactivity, the range of skills required to develop applications for use in a home or smallbusiness is limited. As a consequence, the implementation of such small relationalWHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 4
FIGURE  1.1 A high-level schematic view (dataflow diagram) of a simple payroll system.
Refer to Appendix A for details of this notationBackup
store
P60 data
(text
format)Backup data
GDU
Payroll
SystemClerk OptionsChoice
Employee dataBACS data
(text
format)P60 data
BACS data
Clerk will
perform
backups on
ZIP diskswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 30 ---
database systems has ceased to be a specialized process and relational database design
tools are now available to, and used by, many desktop computer users as part of stan-dard ‘office’ packages. 
However, new demands are being placed on the designers of information systems.
Many hospitals, for example, wish to store waveforms (for example, ECGs or auditoryevoked responses) or images (for example, X-rays or magnetic resonance images) andother complex data from medical tests, alongside conventional text records. An exam-ple of an ECG trace is shown in Figure 1.2.
For the storage of waveforms, images or speech relational databases systems, opti-
mized for handling a limited range of data types (such as strings, characters, integersand real numbers), are not ideal. This has increased interest in object-oriented databasesystems (’object databases’), which are generally considered to be more flexible.
1.3 Desktop systems
The desktop / workstation environment plays host to many information systems, aswell as general-purpose desktop applications, such as word processors. A commoncharacteristic of modern desktop environments is that the user interacts with theapplication through a high-resolution graphics screen, plus a keyboard and a mouse(Figure 1.3). 
In addition to this sophisticated user interface, the key distinguishing characteris-
tics of the desktop system is the associated operating system, which may range fromDOS through to a version of Windows or the UNIX operating system. 
As we will see, the developer of embedded applications rarely has an operating sys-
tem, screen, keyboard or mouse available.INTRODUCTION 5
FIGURE  1.2 An example of an electrocardiogram (ECG) signalTimeVoltagewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 31 ---
1.4 Real-time systems
Users of most software systems like to have their applications respond quickly: the dif-
ference is that in most information systems and general desktop applications, a rapidresponse is a useful feature, while in many real-time systems it is an essential feature.
Consider, for example, the greatly simplified aircraft autopilot application illustrat-
ed schematically in Figure 1.4.
Here, we assume that the pilot has entered the required course heading and that the
system must make regular and frequent changes to the rudder, elevator, aileron andengine settings (for example) in order to keep the aircraft following this path. 
An important characteristic of this system is the need to process inputs and gener-
ate outputs very rapidly, on a time scale measured in milliseconds. In this case, even aslight delay in making changes to the rudder setting (for example) may cause the planeto oscillate very unpleasantly or, in extreme circumstances, even to crash. As a conse-quence of the need for rapid processing, few software engineers would argue with aclaim that the autopilot system is representative of a broad class of real-time systems. 
In order to be able to justify the use of the aircraft system in practice, it is notWHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 6
FIGURE  1.3 An example of part of the design for a GUI-driven desktop applicationDesktop
Publishing
SystemSound
card
KeyboardMouse
ScannerHigh-resolution
graphics screen
Scanner
Reminder
1 second (s) = 1.0 second (100seconds) = 1000 ms.
1 millisecond (ms) = 0.001 seconds (10-3seconds) = 1000 µs.
1 microsecond (µs) = 0.000001 seconds (10-6seconds) = 1000 ns.
1 nanosecond (ns) = 0.000000001 seconds (10-9seconds).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 32 ---
enough simply to ensure that the processing is ‘as fast as we can make it’: in this situ-
ation, as in many other real-time applications, the key characteristic is deterministic
processing. What this means is that in many real-time systems we need to be able toguarantee that a particular activity will always be completed within (say) 2 ms, or at
precisely 6 ms intervals: if the processing does not match this specification, then theapplication is not simply slower than we would like, it is useless . INTRODUCTION 7
x, y, z = position co-ordinates
υ, β, ϖ = velocity co-ordinates
p = roll rateq = pitch rater = yaw rate
x, υ
py, βq
z, ϖ
rAileron
δaElevator
δeRudder
δr
FIGURE  1.4 A high-level schematic view of a simple autopilot systemRoll
(rate)
sensor
Aircraft
Autopilot
System
Main
pilot
controlsPitch
(rate)
sensor
Position
sensors
(GPS)Velocity
sensors
(3 axes)Yaw (rate)
sensors
Elevator
AileronRudder
Main engine
(fuel)
controllerswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 33 ---
Tom De Marco has provided a graphic description of this form of hard real-time
requirement in practice, quoting the words of a manager on a software project: 
‘We build systems that reside in a small telemetry computer, equipped with all kinds of sensors to
measure electromagnetic fields and changes in temperature, sound and physical disturbance. Weanalyze these signals and transmit the results back to a remote computer over a wide-band chan-nel. Our computer is at one end of a one-meter long bar and at the other end is a nuclear device.We drop them together down a big hole in the ground and when the device detonates, our com-puter collects data on the leading edge of the blast. The first two-and-a-quarter milliseconds afterdetonation are the most interesting. Of course, long before millisecond three, things have gonedown hill badly for our little computer. We think of thatas a real-time constraint.
(De Marco, writing in the foreword to Hatley and Pirbhai, 1987)
In this case, it is clear that this real-time system must complete its recording on
time: it has no opportunity for a ‘second try’. This is an extreme example of what issometimes referred to as a ‘hard’ real-time system.
Note that, unlike this military example, many applications (like the aircraft system
outlined earlier), involve repeated sampling of data from the real world (via a trans-ducer and analog-to-digital converter) and, after some (digital) processing, creating anappropriate analog output signal (via a digital-to-analog converter and an actuator).Assuming that we sample the inputs at 1000 Hz then, to qualify as a real-time system,we must be able to process this input and generate the corresponding output, beforewe are due to take the next sample (0.001 seconds later). 
To summarize, consider the following ‘dictionary’ definition of a real-time system:
‘[A] program that responds to events in the world as they happen. For example, an automatic-pilot
program in an aircraft must respond instantly in order to correct deviations from its course. Processcontrol, robotics, games, and many military applications are examples of real-time systems.’
(Hutchinson New Century Encyclopedia (CD ROM edition, 1996)) 
It is important to emphasize that a desire for rapid processing, either on the part of
the designer or on the part of the client for whom the system is being developed, isnot enough, on its own, to justify the description ‘real time’. This is often misunder-stood, even by developers within the software industry. For example, Waites and Knotthave stated:
‘Some business information systems also require real-time control … Typical examples include
airline booking and some stock control systems where rapid turnover is the norm.’
(Waites and Knott, 1996, p.194)
In fact, neither of these systems can sensibly be described as a real-time application. 
1.5 Embedded systems
Although it is widely associated with real-time applications, the category ‘embedded
systems’, like that of desktop systems includes, for example, both real-time and, lessWHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 8www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 34 ---
commonly, information systems. The distinguishing characteristic of an embedded
application is loosely summarized in the box:
Typical examples of such embedded applications include common domestic appli-
ances, such as video recorders, microwave ovens and fridges. Other examples rangefrom cars through combine harvesters to aircraft and numerous defence systems.Please note that this definition excludes applications such as ‘palm computers’ which
– from a developer’s perspective – are best viewed as a cut-down version of a desktopcomputer system. 
While the desktop market is driven by a need to provide ever more performance,
in order to support sophisticated operating systems and applications, the embeddedmarket has rather different needs. For example, recent economic, legislative and tech-nological developments in the automotive sector mean that an increasing number ofroad vehicles contain embedded systems. In some cases, such systems have beenintroduced primarily as a means of reducing production costs: for example, in mod-ern vehicles, expensive (~£600.00) multi-wire looms have now been replaced by atwo-wire controller area network (CAN) computer bus at a fraction of the cost (Perierand Coen, 1998). In other situations, such as the introduction of active suspensionsystems, the embedded systems have been introduced to improve ride quality andhandling (Sharp, 1998). 
Consider a very simple example which may help to illustrate some of the require-
ments of the embedded market: the indicator light circuit for a passenger car. In thisapplication we need to be able to control six or more indicator lights from a switchbehind the steering wheel, allowing the driver to tell other road users that he or sheintends to turn a corner, change lane or park. For the US (and some other) markets, weexpect the indicator circuit to interact with the rear lights (so that one light flashes toindicate the direction of a turn); in Europe, we expect indicator and rear lights to oper-ate separately. Furthermore, in some countries, we wish to use the indicator lights as‘parking lights’, to avoid having people run into our (parked) car at night. 
The Volvo 131 (‘Amazon’) demonstrates the traditional solution to this problem.
This classic European car from the 1960s uses a considerable amount of wire and somemechanical switches to provide indicator and braking behaviour: if we wanted toadjust this car to operate in the US style, we would have make substantial changes tothe wiring loom. To avoid this type of expensive, labour-intensive conversion, moremodern cars use a microcontroller to provide the required behaviour. Not only doesthe microcontroller solution result in a simpler, and cheaper, collection of wires, it canalso be converted between US and European indicator standards by flicking a switchor changing a memory chip.INTRODUCTION 9
An embedded system is an application that contains at least one programmable
computer (typically in the form of a microcontroller, a microprocessor or digital signalprocessor chip) and which is used by individuals who are, in the main, unaware that thesystem is computer-based. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 35 ---
This simple application highlights four important features of many embedded
applications. 
GLike this indicator system, many applications employ microcontrollers not becausethe processing is complex, but because the microcontroller is flexible and, crucially,because it results in a cost-effective solution. As a result, many products haveembedded microcontrollers sitting almost idle for much of their operational life.The fact that many commonly used microcontrollers are, by comparison with mod-ern desktop microprocessors, often rather slow, is seldom of great concern. 
GUnlike most microprocessors, microcontrollers are required to interact with the out-side world, not via keyboards and graphical user interfaces, but via switches, smallkeypads, LEDs and so on. The provision of extensive I/O facilities is a key drivingforce for many microcontroller manufacturers.
GLike the indicator system, most embedded applications are required to execute par-ticular tasks at precise time intervals or at particular instants of time. In this case,for example, the indicators lights must flash on at a precise frequency and dutycycle in order to satisfy legal requirements. This type of application is considered ingreater detail in Chapter 2.
GUnlike many desktop applications (for example) many embedded applications havesafety implications. For example, if the indicator lights fail while the car is in use,this could result in an accident. As a result, reliability is a crucial requirement inmany embedded applications.
1.6 Event-triggered systems
Many applications are now described as ‘event triggered’ or ‘event driven’. For exam-
ple, in the case of modern desktop applications, the various running applications mustrespond to events such as mouse clicks or mouse movements. A key expectation ofusers is that such events will invoke an ‘immediate’ response.
In embedded systems, event-triggered behaviour is often achieved through the use
of interrupts (see following box). To support these, event-triggered system architecturesoften provide multiple interrupt service routines.
What is an interrupt?
From a low-level perspective, an interrupt is a hardware mechanism used to notify aprocessor that an ‘event’ has taken place: such events may be ‘internal’ events (such asthe overflow of a timer) or ‘external’ events (such as the arrival of a character through aserial interface). 
Viewed from a high-level perspective, interrupts provide a mechanism for creating
multitasking applications: that is applications which, apparently, perform more than oneWHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 10Lwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 36 ---
INTRODUCTION 11
task at a time using a single processor. To illustrate this, a schematic representation of
interrupt handling in an embedded system is given in Figure 1.5. 
In Figure 1.5 the system executes two (background) tasks, Task 1 and Task 2. During the
execution of Task 1, an interrupt is raised, and an ‘interrupt service routine’ (ISR1) dealswith this event. During the execution of Task 2, another interrupt is raised, this timedealt with by ISR2. 
Note that, from the perspective of the programmer, an ISR is simply a function that
is ‘called by the microcontroller’, as a result of a particular hardware event. 
1.7 Time-triggered systems
The main alternative to event-triggered systems architectures are time-triggeredarchitectures (see, for example, Kopetz, 1997). As with event-triggered architectures,time-triggered approaches are used in both desktop systems and in embedded systems.
To understand the difference between the two approaches, consider that a hospital
doctor must look after the needs of ten seriously ill patients overnight, with the supportof some nursing staff. The doctor might consider two ways of performing this task:
GThe doctor might arrange for one of the nursing staff to waken her, if there is asignificant problem with one of the patients. This is the ‘event-triggered’ solution.
L
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5ISR 1
Task 1
Task 2Background Foreground
Time
Task 1
Task 2ISR 2
FIGURE  1.5 A schematic representation of interrupt handling in an embedded systemwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 37 ---
WHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 12
GThe doctor might set her alarm clock to ring every hour. When the alarm goes off,
she will get up and visit each of the patients, in turn, to check that they are welland, if necessary, prescribe treatment. This is the ‘time-triggered’ solution.
For most doctors, the event-triggered approach will seem the more attractive, because
they are likely to get a few hours of sleep during the course of the night. By contrast,with the time-triggered approach, the doctor will inevitably suffer sleep deprivation.
However, in the case of many embedded systems – which do not need sleep – the
time-triggered approach has many advantages. Indeed, within industrial sectors wheresafety is an obvious concern, such as the aerospace industry and, increasingly, theautomotive industry, time-triggered techniques are widely used because it is accepted,both by the system developers and their certification authorities, that they helpimprove reliability and safety (see, for example, Allworth, 1981; MISRA, 1994; Storey,1996; Nissanke, 1997; Bates, 2000 for discussion of these issues).
The main reason that time-triggered approaches are preferred in safety-related appli-
cations is that they result in systems which have very predictable behaviour. If we revis-
it the hospital analogy, we can begin to see why this is so. 
Suppose, for example, that our ‘event-triggered’ doctor is sleeping peacefully. An
apparently minor problem develops with one of the patients and the nursing staffdecide not to awaken the doctor but to deal with the problem themselves. After anoth-er two hours, when four patients have ‘minor’ problems, the nurses decide that theywill have to wake the doctor after all. As soon as the doctor sees the patients, she rec-ognizes that two of them have a severe complications, and she has to begin surgery.Before she can complete the surgery on the first patient, the second patient is veryclose to death.
Consider the same example with the ‘time-triggered’ doctor. In this case, because
the patient visits take place at hourly intervals, the doctor sees each patient before seri-ous complications arise and arranges appropriate treatment. Another way of viewingthis is that the workload is spread out evenly throughout the night. As a result, all thepatients survive the night without difficulty.
In embedded applications, the (rather macabre) hospital situation is mirrored in the
event-driven application by the occurrence of several events (that is, several interrupts)at the same time. This might indicate, for example, that two different faults had beendetected simultaneously in an aircraft or simply that two switches had been pressed atthe same time on a keypad. 
To see why the simultaneous occurrence of two interrupts causes a problem, con-
sider what happens in the 8051 architecture in these circumstances. Like many micro-controllers, the original 8051 architecture supports two different interrupt priority lev-els: low and high. If two interrupts (we will call them Interrupt 1 and Interrupt 2) occurin rapid succession, the system will behave as follows:
GIf Interrupt 1 is a low-priority interrupt and Interrupt 2 is a high-priority interrupt: 
The interrupt service routine (ISR) invoked by a low-priority interrupt can be interrupted
by a high-priority interrupt. In this case, the low-priority ISR will be paused, to allow thehigh-priority ISR to be executed, after which the operation of the low-priority ISR will bewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 38 ---
completed. In most cases, the system will operate correctly (provided that the two ISRs do
not interfere with one another) .
GIf Interrupt 1 is a low-priority interrupt and Interrupt 2 is also a low-priority interrupt: 
The ISR invoked by a low-priority interrupt cannot be interrupted by another low-
priority interrupt. As a result, the response to the second interrupt will be at the very leastdelayed; under some circumstances it will be ignored altogether .
GIf Interrupt 1 is a high-priority interrupt and Interrupt 2 is a low-priority interrupt:
The interrupt service routine (ISR) invoked by a high-priority interrupt cannot be
interrupted by a low-priority interrupt. As a result, the response to the second interrupt willbe at the very least delayed; under some circumstances it will be ignored altogether .
GIf Interrupt 1 is a high-priority interrupt and Interrupt 2 is also a high-priority
interrupt:
The interrupt service routine (ISR) invoked by a high-priority interrupt cannot be inter-
rupted by another high-priority interrupt. As a result, the response to the second interruptwill be at the very least delayed; under some circumstances it will be ignored altogether .
It is the need to deal with the simultaneous occurrence of more than one event that
both adds to the system complexity and reduces the ability to predict the behaviour ofan event-triggered system under all circumstances. By contrast, in a time-triggeredembedded application, the designer is able to ensure that only single events must behandled at a time, in a carefully controlled sequence.
As already mentioned, the predictable nature of time-triggered applications makes
this approach the usual choice in safety-related applications, where reliability is a cru-cial design requirement. However, the need for reliability is not restricted to systemssuch as fly-by-wire aircraft and drive-by-wire passenger cars: even at the lowest level,an alarm clock that fails to sound on time or a video recorder that operates intermit-tently, or a data monitoring system that – once a year – loses a few bytes of data maynot have safety implications but, equally, will not have high sales figures. 
In addition to increasing reliability, the use of time-triggered techniques can help to
reduce both CPU loads and memory usage: as a result, as we demonstrate throughoutthis book, even the smallest of embedded applications can benefit from the use of thisform of system architecture.INTRODUCTION 13
Note carefully what this means! There is a common misconception among the devel-
opers of embedded applications that interrupt events will never be lost. This simplyis not true. If you have multiple sources of interrupts that may appear at ‘random’time intervals, interrupt responses can be missed: indeed, where there are severalactive interrupt sources, it is practically impossible to create code that will deal cor-rectly with all possible combinations of interrupts.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 39 ---
1.8 Conclusions
The various characteristics of time-triggered embedded systems introduced in this
chapter will be explored in greater depth throughout this book. 
In the next chapter, we consider why ‘traditional’ software design techniques pro-
vide only limited support for the developers of this type of application and argue thatsoftware patterns can provide a useful adjunct to existing approaches.WHAT IS A TIME-TRIGGERED EMBEDDED SYSTEM? 14www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 40 ---
Designing embedded systems
using patterns
In this second introductory chapter, we consider why ‘traditional’ software design tech-
niques provide only limited support for the developers of embedded applications andargue that software patterns can provide a useful adjunct to such techniques.
2.1 Introduction
Most branches of engineering have a long history. Work in the area of control systems,
for example, might be said to have begun with the seminal studies by James Watt on theflywheel governor in the 1760s, while work in electrical engineering can be dated backto the work of Michael Faraday, who is generally credited with the invention of the elec-tric motor in 1821. It can be argued that the practice of civil engineering has the longesthistory of all, originating, perhaps, with the building of the Egyptian pyramids, or toGreek or Roman times: certainly the Institution of Civil Engineers was founded inEngland (UK) in 1818 and is the oldest professional engineering institution in the world.
For the software engineer, a different situation applies. The first mass-produced
minicomputer, the PDP-8, was launched only in 1965 and the first microprocessoronly in 1971. As a result of the comparatively late introduction, and subsequent rapidevolution, of small programmable computer systems, the field of software engineeringhas had little opportunity to mature. In the limited time available, much work on soft-ware engineering has focused on the design process and, in particular, on the devel-opment and use of various graphical notations, including process-oriented notations,such as dataflow diagrams (Yourdon, 1989: see Figure 2.1), and object-oriented nota-tions, such as the ‘Unified Modelling Language’ (Fowler and Scott, 2000). The use ofsuch notations is supported by ‘methodologies’: these are collections of ‘recipes’ forchapter  2www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 41 ---
INTRODUCTION 16
FIGURE  2.1 An example of part of the design for a washing machine, showing (top) the context
diagram and (bottom) the Level 1 dataflow diagram
[Note: that in this example, and throughout most of this book, we have used a process-oriented (dataflow) notation1to record the
design solutions: this remains the most popular approach for embedded applications, in part because process-oriented languages(notably ‘C’) are popular in this area. Although object-oriented languages (like C++) are comparatively uncommon in microcontro ller-
based embedded projects at the present time, object-oriented design notations could equally well be used to record the design p re-
sented here.]MainRun
SchedulerInit
System
Timer
22 31T TWater
temperatureStart sw
status
Water levelWash program
setting
LED data
Timer 2 Tick
Door lock
statusTimer 2
parameters Water valve
statusMotor statusLED dataDoor lock
statusDoor
LockWater
ValveLED
Indicators
Drum
MotorWashing
Machine
ControllerWater
Level
SensorSelector
DialStart
Switch
Temperature
SensorDoor lock
statusWater valve
statusLED
data
Motor
statusWater
levelWash program
settingStart sw
status
Water
temperature
1. Please refer to Appendix A for details of this notation.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 42 ---
software design, detailing how and when particular notations should be used in a proj-
ect (see, for example, Pont, 1996). The designs that result from the application of thesetechniques consist of a set of linked diagrams, each following a standard notation, andaccompanied by appropriate supporting documentation (Yourdon, 1989; Booch, 1994;Pont, 1996; Fowler and Scott, 2000). 
As the title suggests, we are concerned in this book with the development of soft-
ware for embedded systems. In the past, despite the ubiquitous nature of embeddedapplications, the design of such systems has not been a major focus of attention with-in the software field. Indeed, in almost all cases, software design techniques have beendeveloped first to meet the needs of the developers of desktop business systems(DeMarco, 1978; Rumbaugh et al., 1991; Coleman et al., 1994), and then subsequent-
ly ‘adapted’ in an attempt to meet the needs of developers of real-time and / or embed-ded applications (Hatley and Pirbhai, 1987; Selic et al., 1994; Awad et al., 1996;
Douglass, 1998). We will argue (in Section 2.2) that the resulting software design tech-niques, although not without merit, cannot presently meet the needs of the designersof embedded systems. We then go on to propose (Sections 2.2 and 2.4) that the use ofsoftware patterns as an adjunct to existing techniques represents a promising way toalleviate some of the current problems.
2.2 Limitations of existing software design techniques
We begin the main part of this chapter by considering two examples whichillustrate the limitations of standard design techniques when used for embeddedsystem development. 
Cruise-control system
As a first example, we will consider a cruise-control system (CCS) for a road vehicle. ACCS is often used to demonstrate the effectiveness of real-time software designmethodologies (for example, see Hatley and Pirbhai, 1987; Awad et al., 1996). Such a
system is usually assumed to be required to take over the task of maintaining the vehi-cle at a constant speed even while negotiating a varying terrain, involving, for exam-ple, hills or corners in the road. Subject to certain conditions (typically that the vehi-cle is in top gear and exceeding a preset minimum speed), the cruise control is furtherassumed to be engaged by the driver via a push switch on the dashboard and disen-gaged by touching the brake pedal.
As an example, an outline process-oriented (‘structured’) design for such a system is
illustrated in Figure 2.2 to Figure 2.5. This design is adapted from that suggested byHatley and Pirbhai (1987) in a standard text on real-time software design. Starting at thehighest level of abstraction, Figure 2.2 shows the ‘context diagram’ for the system. Figure2.3 shows the corresponding Level 1 dataflow diagram, which describes in more detailthe processing carried by the process ‘simple cruise control’ in Figure 2.2. Figure 2.4
in turn shows the state-transition diagram associated with ‘main control process’in Figure 2.3.DESIGNING EMBEDDED SYSTEMS USING PATTERNS 17www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 43 ---
INTRODUCTION 18
FIGURE  2.2 The context diagram for the simple cruise-control systemSimple
Cruise
ControlSpeed
sensorCurrent speedCruise
button
Brake
sensorCruise
BrakeThrottleThrottle
setting
FIGURE  2.3 The Level 1 dataflow diagram for the cruise-control systemMain
control
process
1Desired
speed
Maintain
speed
3Select
speed
2
T Desired speed
E/D Desired speed
Current speedCurrent speed
Throttle
settingCruise
Brakewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 44 ---
To complete this simple design, we need to define more precisely the operation of
the two processes ‘set speed’ and ‘maintain speed’. Of these, the second is the morecomplex and will be discussed here. Hatley and Pirbhai (1987) present the ‘processspecification’ given in Figure 2.5 for their version of the ‘maintain speed’ process.
Overall, there are a number of problems with this design solution. For example, little
consideration is given to the system architecture to be employed, and the consequencesthis will have for the rest of the design. In addition, Hatley and Pirbhai (1987) present
their version of the control algorithm at the heart of the system (see Figure 2.5) largelyDESIGNING EMBEDDED SYSTEMS USING PATTERNS 19
FIGURE  2.4 The state-transition diagram associated with the control process in Figure 2.2Cruising
BRAKE DEPRESSED
D: "Maintain speed"
DoneCRUISE CONTROL ACTIV ATED
T: "Select speed"
E: "Maintain speed"
FIGURE  2.5 A possible process specification (‘PSpec’) for the ‘Maintain Speed’ process (adapted from
Hatley and Pirbhai, 1987, p.291) 
[Note: VTh= Throttle setting; SD= Desired speed; SA= Actual speed. The throttle setting is assumed (here) to be proportional to an
output voltage: a 0Voutput closes the throttle, and an 8 Voutput sets it fully open. The intention is to vary the throttle setting
when the actual speed varies by more than 2mph above or below the desired speed. The rate of throttle movement is restricted to0.8V / second.]Set: Subject to:
0; ( SD– SA)>2 dVTh
VTh= {2(SD– SA+ 2);   –2 ≤(SD– SA)≤2 }≤0.8V/ sec
8; –2> ( SD– SA)dtwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 45 ---
without comment. They do not consider ‘standard’ control techniques, such as
‘proportional-integral-differential’ (PID) control, as solutions to this problem,2and give
no indication how the effectiveness of the chosen approach should be assessed (or eventhat it should be assessed). This is not particularly unusual in software texts: for example,some ten years later, Awad et al. (1996) describe, in considerably more detail, an object-
oriented design for the same cruise control system and, again, largely ignore these issues.
Alarm clock
Of course, a CCS is a specialized product and it might reasonably be argued that most
developers would not expect to tackle the production of such an application withouthaving previous experience in the automotive area. However, similar problems arise ifin the simplest of embedded applications.
Assume, for example, that you have been asked to develop an alarm clock applica-
tion that operates as follows:
GTime is displayed on an LED display.
GThe time may be adjusted by the user.
GAn (optional) alarm will sound at a time determined by the user.
A sketch of the required user interface is given in Figure 2.6.
To create the design for such an application in a ‘traditional’ manner, we might
begin by drawing a context diagram (Figure 2.7).INTRODUCTION 20
To design many embedded systems successfully, including this cruise control system,
requires not just knowledge of software engineering and microcontroller hardware, butalso contributions from related technical and engineering fields, often including instru-mentation, digital signal processing, artificial intelligence and control theory. In ourexperience, such contributions are often essential to the success of real-time softwareprojects, yet they are not part of the formal training of the majority of software engi-neers and are frequently ignored in books and papers on real-time software design.
As with the CCS, the notation can only assist us in recording design decisions: it cannot
assist in making those decisions. For example, in this type of application, a basic require-ment is to display information on the LED display. In most cases, to reduce costs, a multi-plexed display will be used. As we discuss in Chapter 21, in a multiplexed, 4-digit, LED dis-play, we need to refresh the display approximately every 5 ms. The need to update thisdisplay at this frequency will have implications for the software architecture of the wholeapplication and must be taken into account very early in the design process. If the design-er of the system is unaware of this basic requirement, then many of the assumptions thatunderlie the design will be wrong, and a large amount of expensive and time-consumingredesign will be required when the project reaches the implementation phase. 
2. We discuss PID control algorithms in Chapter 35.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 46 ---
DESIGNING EMBEDDED SYSTEMS USING PATTERNS 21
FIGURE  2.6 The required user interface. [a] The normal (current time) display when the alarm is not
set. [b] The normal (current time) display when the alarm is set to ring. [c] The alarm timedisplay when the A button is pressed
[Note: Pressing The A + H buttons will let the user change the alarm time (hours): the A + M buttons will similarly change the alarm  time
(minutes). The same procedure, using the T button will be used to change the displayed time. Pressing the A button when the ala rm
sounds will stop the alarm.]T H M
(c)AT H M
(a)A T H M
(b)A
FIGURE  2.7 A possible context diagram for an alarm clock applicationLED
DisplayBuzzer
Alarm
Clock
Hours
SwitchAlarm
SwitchTime
Switch
Minutes
Switchwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 47 ---
2.3 Patterns
We can sum up the conclusions from these two examples by saying that – for those
developers with experience of control system design, or the use of LED displays – thetasks are straightforward: however, for those without such experience, even the small-est of decisions can have unexpected repercussions. Unfortunately, the standard designnotations that have been developed do not provide any means of substituting for thelack of experience on the part of a particular designer. The consequence is not difficultto predict, and is summarized succinctly in this quotation from an experienced devel-oper of embedded applications: ‘It’s ludicrous the way we software people reinvent thewheel with every project’ (Ganssle, 1992).
To address these problems use of ‘objects’, ‘agents’ or any new form of software
building block or design notation will not greatly help. Instead, what is needed is ameans of what we might call ‘recycling design experience’: specifically, we would liketo find a way of incorporating techniques for reusing successful design solutions intothe design process.
Recently, many developers have found that software patterns offer a way of achiev-
ing this. Current work on software patterns has been inspired by the work ofChristopher Alexander and his colleagues (for example Alexander et al ., 1977;
Alexander, 1979). Alexander is an architect who first described what he called ‘a pat-tern language’ relating various architectural problems (in buildings) to good designsolutions. He defines patterns as ‘a three-part rule, which expresses a relation betweena certain context, a problem, and a solution’ (Alexander, 1979, p.247).
For example, consider Alexander’s 
WINDOW PLACE pattern, summarized briefly in
Figure 2.8. This takes the form of a recognizable problem, linked to a correspondingsolution. More specifically, like all good patterns, 
WINDOW PLACE does the following:
GIt describes, clearly and concisely, a successful solution to a significant and well-defined problem.
GIt describes the circumstances in which it is appropriate to apply this solution.
GIt provides a rationale for this solution.
GIt describes the consequences of applying the solution.
GIt gives the solution a name.
This basic concept of descriptive problem–solution mappings was adopted by Ward
Cunningham and Kent Beck who used some of Alexander’s techniques as the basis fora small ‘pattern language’ intended to provide guidance to novice Smalltalk program-mers (Cunningham and Beck, 1987). This work was subsequently built upon by ErichGamma and colleagues who, in 1995, published an influential book on general-purpose object-oriented software patterns (Gamma et al., 1995). 
For example, consider the 
OBSERVER pattern (Gamma et al., 1995), illustrated in
Figure 2.9. This describes how to link the components in a multi-component applica-tion, so that when the state of one part of the system is altered, all other related partsare notified and, if necessary, updated. This pattern successfully solves the problem,while leaving the various system components loosely coupled, so that they may bemore easily altered or reused in subsequent projects. INTRODUCTION 22www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 48 ---
DESIGNING EMBEDDED SYSTEMS USING PATTERNS 23
FIGURE  2.8 A summary of the WINDOW PLACE architectural pattern (adapted from Alexander et al.,
1977)WINDOW PLACE
Context
WINDOW PLACE is an architectural pattern. It is most frequently applied in the design of hotels,
offices or substantial houses.
Problem
You need to design a ‘living room’ in which people will congregate to sit and talk, drink tea, readnewspapers, and so forth.
Solution
In developing a solution to this problem, Alexander et al. made the following observations:
GDuring the day, people generally dislike spending time in rooms without windows.
GWhen a room has windows, then people will be drawn to them. As a result, if the seating area
is adjacent to the windows (preferably so that people can see out from their seats), then mostpeople will tend to feel comfortable.
GBy contrast, if the windows are on one side of the room and the seats on the other, most
people will tend to feel uncomfortable. 
Based on these observations (presented in greater detail in the original than is possible here),
Alexander et al. proposed that, in solving this problem, architects should aim to create a well-lit
‘window place’, where people can sit comfortably adjacent to the window.
OBSERVER
Context
OBSERVER is a software pattern, intended for use in applications with two or more communicating
components. The description given by Gamma et al. focuses on the development of desktop applica-
tions, but the pattern may also be applied in certain (comparatively complex) embedded systems.
Problem
You need to implement a one-to-many dependency between components in an application so thatwhen the state of one component is altered, all other related components are notified and, if nec-essary, updated. 
For example, suppose you are developing a spreadsheet application. In such a program, the same infor-
mation may be displayed (for example) in a table, as a bar chart and as a pie chart. Changes to any ofthese displays need to be reflected in the others, illustrated as:
01020304050
20
A50
A30
A
30 50 20C B A
A
20% C
30%
B
50%Lwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 49 ---
2.4 Patterns for time-triggered embedded systems
We found the software patterns described by Gamma et al . (1995) to be useful.
However, they were insufficiently specialized for use with time-triggered embeddedsystems. We therefore began to assemble a collection of patterns based on our experi-ence with the development of applications for the 8051 and other families of micro-controllers. 
The first version of these patterns were used ‘in house’, primarily for teaching and
training purposes. We then began to publish and discuss the next versions of the pat-terns more widely, not just at pattern workshops (see, for example, Pont et al., 1999a;
Pont, in press) but also at more general technical conferences (see, for example, Pont,1998; Pont et al., 1999b). Through this process we obtained a great deal of useful feed-INTRODUCTION 24
FIGURE  2.9 An overview of the pattern OBSERVER (adapted from Gamma et al., 1995)Solution
OBSERVER describes how to break down such applications into ‘subject’ and ‘observer’ components.
As described by Gamma et al., a subject may have any number of observers, all of which are noti-
fied when the state of the subject changes: in response, observers will (usually) synchronize theirstate with the subject’s state, illustrated schematically as:
Applicability and consequences
One of the situations is which OBSERVER may be applied is when a change to one component
requires changing others, and you do not know how many other components need to be altered.
One important consequence of using this pattern is that the various communicating components
are loosely coupled together: this means, for example, that new components can be added, orexisting components can be removed, with little impact on the rest of the program.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The type of interaction described in OBSERVER is also referred to as a publish-subscribe relationship.
Gamma et al. describe two related patterns: MEDIATOR and SINGLETON . These are not
considered further here.
Examples
Gamma et al. describe applications in which OBSERVER has been employed.A
20% C
30%
B
50%30 50 20C B A01020304050
20
A50
A30
AObservers
Subjectwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 50 ---
back on the project, and refined the collection again. The end result was the set of pat-
terns described in detail throughout this book.
The structure of the final version of the patterns is illustrated in Figure 2.10. The
patterns are grouped by chapter, and the book is further divided into sections. Thisarrangement is intended to make it easy for you to find the information you require. 
2.5 Conclusions
In this second brief introductory chapter, we have argued that developers of embed-ded applications can benefit from pattern-driven design techniques not least becausemany embedded projects require the developer to have both knowledge of softwaredesign and from a range of related technical and engineering fields. 
Four points should be made as we conclude this chapter:
GSoftware patterns should not be seen as an attempt to produce a panacea or whatBrooks (1986) calls a ‘silver bullet’ for the problems of embedded software designor implementation. Software development is a multifaceted activity, requiringintelligence and creativity: the solutions to such problems come from intelligentand creative individuals, and there are no ‘miracle cures’ or ‘silver bullets’ waitingto be uncovered.
GFor similar reasons, use of the patterns in this book does not guarantee that yoursystem will be reliable. Thus, for example, the first time you get on a plane and thepilot announces, reassuringly, that the flight control software was designed by engi-neers who used the latest set of ‘time-triggered software patterns’, this may meanthat the software is more reliable than it would have been if the designers and pro-grammers had not been exposed to a set of patterns like those presented in thisbook. However, it can never mean that the flight software is fault free.
GAt best, ‘the pattern solution’ will be a partial one. For example, it is not feasible toprovide all software engineers or their managers, irrespective of background ortraining, with sufficient knowledge of relevant fields to ensure that they can, forexample, create appropriate designs for aircraft flight control systems or faultdiagnosis systems based on sliding-mode observers. However, what we may be ableto achieve is to make software managers, and the teams they manage, better able torecognize projects in which it would be advisable to appoint (say) an artificial intel-ligence, signal processing or control expert from within the company on theproject team or to employ an outside consultant to fulfil such a rôle.
GNo useful pattern collection is ever ‘finished’: further patterns will gradually beadded and existing patterns can always be improved. This collection is certainly noexception. As discussed in the preface, your comments and feedback on this collec-tion would be very much appreciated.DESIGNING EMBEDDED SYSTEMS USING PATTERNS 25www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 51 ---
INTRODUCTION 26
<PATTERN NAME >
Context
‘Context’ summarizes situations in which you may find the pattern useful. In most of the patterns in this
book, the overall context will be similar:
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the 8051 family of micro-
controllers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
However, in most cases, the pattern will be more focused. For example:
GThe application is to be powered by batteries.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
‘Problem’ provides a brief summary of the problem which is addressed by the pattern. For example:
GWhen and how should you use a quartz crystal to create an oscillator with members of the 8051 fam-
ily of microcontrollers?
GHow do you create and use a co-operative scheduler?
Background
‘Background’ provides information that will help less experienced developers make full use of the pattern .
Solution
The solution section describes one or more solutions to the problem addressed by the pattern. This solu-
tion may include software designs, code listings and / or hardware schematics.
Hardware resource implications
Every pattern provides and / or consumes hardware resources. For example, the microcontroller patterns(Chapter 3) provide CPU and limited memory resources and the external memory patterns (Chapter 6)provide substantial additional memory resources. By contrast, most of the remaining patterns require bothCPU and memory resources. Part of the design process involves balancing the need for, and provision of,hardware resources: ‘Hardware resource implications’ helps to achieve this.
Reliability and safety implications
Many patterns have potential reliability and safety implications: such issues are discussed in this section.
Portability
This section considers issues involved in porting the pattern to a different microcontroller.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
This section summarises both the strengths
… and the weaknesses of the pattern.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
This pattern may not be precisely what you require. ‘Related patterns and alternative solutions’ discusses
alternative solutions, and gives references to other, related patterns that may also be of interest.
Example
At least one example of the application of each pattern is given.
Further reading
‘Further reading’ gives suggestions for sources of additional information relevant to those using this pattern.
FIGURE  2.10 The structure of the patterns in this bookwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 52 ---
Hardware foundations
The patterns in Part A are concerned with the creation of the basic hardware foundation
that is required in all microcontroller-based embedded applications.
We begin by considering the microcontroller itself. Often the initial choice of processor
must be made early in the project life-cycle; this choice will have a substantial impact onmany later software and hardware design decisions and development costs can besubstantially reduced if subsequent changes can be avoided. In Chapter 3, a small set ofpatterns are presented to help you decide whether a member of the 8051 family is appro-priate for your application and, if so, which one you should use.
We then turn our attention to oscillator circuits. All digital computer systems are driven
by some form of oscillator. This circuit is the ‘heartbeat’ of the system and is crucial to cor-rect operation. For example, if the oscillator fails, the system will not function at all; if theoscillator runs irregularly, any timing calculations performed by the system will be inaccu-rate. In Chapter 4, two key forms of oscillator circuit are discussed and compared.
We next consider the non-trivial process required to start the microcontroller when
power is applied. Because of the system complexity, a small, manufacturer-defined ‘resetroutine’ must be run to place this hardware into an appropriate state before it can beginexecuting the user program. Running this reset routine takes time and requires that themicrocontroller’s oscillator is operating. In Chapter 5, we consider different ways of creat-ing a suitable reset circuit.
Memory is the next important issue we need to consider. Specifically, in Chapter 6, we
explore techniques for making effective use of the internal memory in the 8051 familyand, where necessary, of adding external (code and / or data) memory to the system.
Finally, we consider how you can create the hardware needed to drive DC loads (in
Chapter 7) and AC loads (in Chapter 8). part awww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 53 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 54 ---
The 8051 microcontroller family
Introduction
Early in the life-cycle of most embedded projects, an initial choice of microcontroller
must be made. While it may become necessary to change the microcontroller as theproject develops, the particular hardware platform that is used will have a substantialimpact on many later software and hardware design decisions and development costscan be substantially reduced if subsequent changes can be avoided.
In this chapter, three patterns are presented to support this selection process:
GSTANDARD 8051 [page 30]
G SMALL 8051 [page 41]
GEXTENDED 8051 [page 46]chapter3
Note that using any processor family requires a considerable investment in hard-
ware, software and staff training: few firms can afford to select devices on aper-project basis: instead, they tend to specialize in a single family or a smallnumber of families. As we will see, the huge – and growing – range of 8051 devicesavailable can make it an excellent choice for a wide range of projects and, as aresult, can frequently justify this investment.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 55 ---
STANDARD 8051
Context
You are developing a microcontroller-based embedded application and have some
flexibility in the choice of hardware platform to be used. 
Problem
Should you base your application on a standard 8051-family microcontroller?
Background
Taken as a whole, the 8051 family has what is, in the semiconductor world, a verylong history. The underlying architecture is derived from that of the Intel 8048 micro-controller (introduced in 1976): the first 8051 was introduced in 1980 (Intel, 1985). 
The original 8051 architecture had the following features:
GUp to 12 MHz operating frequency.
GThirty-two digital input / output pins (arranged as four 8-bit ports).
GInternal data (RAM) memory – 128 bytes.
GThree versions with different program memory options: 
– No program memory: all programs needed to be stored in external memory (8031)– 4K ×8 bits internal mask-programmed ROM (8051)
– 4K ×8 bits UV-eraseable EPROM (8751)
GTwo 16-bit timer / counters (Timer 0 and Timer 1).
GFive interrupt sources were provided (two external) with two priority levels.
GOne programmable, full-duplex, serial port.
The external interface to the 8051 is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Shortly after the launch of the 8051, the 8052 was launched (again by Intel). The
8052 differed in several important respects from the earlier device. The 8052 had thefollowing features:
GInternal data (RAM) memory was increased to 256 bytes.
GTwo 8052 versions were available with different program memory options: 
– No program memory: all programs needed to be stored in external memory (8032)– 8K ×8 bits internal mask-programmed ROM (8052)
GThree 16-bit timer / counters (Timer 0, Timer 1 and Timer 2).
GSix interrupt sources were provided (two external) with two priority levels.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 30www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 56 ---
The 8052 added useful features to the basic architecture, particularly the additional
RAM and ‘Timer 2’. It was also ‘upwardly compatible’ with the 8051: that is, it waspin, and code compatible with the 8051. Because of this, in almost all cases, modern‘standard’ 8051 devices are based on the 8052 family. Within this text, we will con-sider ‘Standard 8051’ devices to be those which are pin and code compatible witheither the 8051 or (more commonly) the 8052 device. 
The popular Atmel 89S53 is a representative example of a modern Standard 8051.
Listed here is a summary of the main features of the AT89S53:
GFully static operation: 0–24 MHz operating frequency.
GThirty-two input / output lines (arranged as four 8-bit ports).
GInternal data (RAM) memory – 256 bytes.
G12 Kbytes of ‘in circuit programmable’ ROM.STANDARD 8051 31
FIGURE  3.1 The external interface of the 8051 microcontroller (40-pin package)
[Note: that many of the digital I/O pins have alternative functions: for example, in applications involving a UART-based serial inte rface,
Pins 3.0 and 3.1 are used (see Chapter 18). Note also that the alternative functions on pins 1.0 and 1.1 are only provided on 8 052-
based derivatives.]P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 57 ---
GThree 16-bit timers / counters (Timer 2 with up/down counter feature).
GNine interrupts (two external) with two priority levels.
GProgrammable watchdog timer (see Chapter 12).
GSPI interface (see Chapter 24).
GLow-power idle and power-down modes.
G4V to 6V operating range.
Modern Standard 8051 devices like the AT89S53 are now generally packaged in 40-
pin DIP, 44-pin PLCC or 44-pin MQFP cases. Examples of each type of package areshown in Figure 3.2.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 32
FIGURE  3.2 Examples of common packages used for the Standard 8051 (in this case, the Atmel
AT89S53). [Left] The DIP package. [Middle] The PLCC package. [Right] The MQFP package(reproduced courtesy of Atmel Corporation)(T2) P1.0
(T2 EX) P1.1
P1.2P1.3
(—SS) P1.4
(MOSI) P1.5(MISO) P1.6
(SCK) P1.7
RST
(RXD) P3.0(TXD) P3.1
(—IN—T0) P3.2
(—IN—T1) P3.3
(T0) P3.4(T1) P3.5
(—–WR) P3.6
(—–RD) P3.7
XTAL2XTAL1
GND1234567891011121314151617181920VCC
P0.0 (AD0)P0.1 (AD1)P0.2 (AD2)P0.3 (AD3)P0.4 (AD4)P0.5 (AD5)P0.6 (AD6)P0.7 (AD7)—EA/VPP
ALE/—PR—OG–
—PS—EN–
P2.7 (A15)
P2.6 (A14)P2.5 (A13)P2.4 (A12)P2.3 (A11)P2.2 (A10)P2.1 (A9)P2.0 (A8)40
39383736353433323130292827262524232221
(MOSI) P1.5(MISO) P1.6
(SCK) P1.7
RST
(RXD) P3.0
NC
(TXD) P3.1
(—IN—T0) P3.2
(—IN—T1) P3.3
(T0) P3.4(T1) P3.57891011121314151617
(—–WR) P3.6
(—–RD) P3.7
XTAL2XTAL1
GND
NC
(A8) P2.0(A9) P2.1
(A10) P2.2(A11) P2.3(A12) P2.41819202122232425262728P0.4 (AD4)P0.5 (AD5)P0.6 (AD6)P0.7 (AD7)EA/VPPNCALE/—PR—OG–
—PS—EN–
P2.7 (A15)
P2.6 (A14)P2.5 (A13)3938373635343332313029654321
4443424140P1.4 (—SS)
P1.3P1.2P1.1 (T2 EX)P1.0 (T2)NCVCCP0.0 (AD0)P0.1 (AD1)P0.2 (AD2)P0.3 (AD3)
(MOSI) P1.5(MISO) P1.6
(SCK) P1.7
RST
(RXD) P3.0
NC
(TXD) P3.1
(—IN—T0) P3.2
(—IN—T1) P3.3
(T0) P3.4(T1) P3.51234567891011
(—–WR) P3.6
(—–RD) P3.7
XTAL2XTAL1
GNDGND
(A8) P2.0(A9) P2.1
(A10) P2.2(A11) P2.3(A12) P2.41213141516171819202122P0.4 (AD4)P0.5 (AD5)P0.6 (AD6)P0.7 (AD7)EA/VPPNCALE/—PR—OG–
—PS—EN–
P2.7 (A15)
P2.6 (A14)P2.5 (A13)33323130292827262524234443424140393837363534P1.4 (—SS)
P1.3P1.2P1.1 (T2 EX)P1.0 (T2)NCVCCP0.0 (AD0)P0.1 (AD1)P0.2 (AD2)P0.3 (AD3)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 58 ---
STANDARD 8051 33
Solution
The aim of this pattern is to help you decide whether you should use a Standard 8051
in your application. When making such a decision, some or all of the following ques-tions need to be addressed: 
1Is the microcontroller powerful enough to perform the required tasks?
2Does the microcontroller have sufficient memory ‘on chip’ to store the requiredcode and data? If not, then does the microcontroller allow the use of appropriateexternal memory?
3Does the microcontroller have appropriate on-chip hardware components (forexample, CAN interface, PWM interface) to support the required tasks?
4Does the microcontroller have sufficient port pins (or a suitable serial interface) toallow any required external components (such as switches, keypads, LCD displays)to be connected? 
5Is the power consumption of the chosen microcontroller appropriate (a particularconcern with battery powered applications)?
We will consider each of these points in turn here.
Performance issues
One of the first question to be asked when considering a microcontroller for a project
is whether it has the required level of performance. There are various ways in whichsuch performance may be described: one measure is the number of machine instruc-tions that may be executed in one second, usually expressed in MIPS (millioninstructions per second).
For example, in an original Intel 8051 microcontroller (and most current members of
the 8051 family), a minimum of 12 oscillator cycles are required to execute a machineinstruction. As a result, at best, a 12 MHz 8051 has a performance of approximately 1 MIP.What’s in a name?
It should be noted that the naming of various members of the ‘8051’ family is a
source of considerable confusion to new developers. For example, the 8031, 8751,8052, 8032, C505c, C515, C509, 80C517, 83C452, ADµC812, and the 80C390 areall members of the 8051 family. The names of the devices provide little or no indica-tion of the family connections.
Originally, there were some basic conventions used to identify the features of differ-
ent variants of a particular 8051 device. For example, the standard 8051 had maskROM, the 8031 had no ROM and the 8751 had UV-erasable ROM memory. This basicconvention is now rarely observed. In the case of the Infineon C501, for example, dif-ferent suffixes are used to distinguish different C501 versions: C501-1R, C501-1E, andso on.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 59 ---
A simple way of improving this performance is to increase the clock frequency.
More modern (Standard) 8051 devices allow the use of clock speeds well beyond the12 MHz limit of the original devices. For example, the Infineon C501 allows clockspeeds up to 40 MHz: this raises the performance to around 3 MIPS. 
Another way of improving the performance is to make internal changes to the
microcontroller so that fewer oscillator cycles are required to execute each machineinstruction. The Dallas ‘high speed microcontroller’ devices (87C520 and similar) usethis approach, so that only four oscillator cycles are required to execute a machineinstruction. These Dallas devices also allow faster clock rates: typically up to 33 MHz.Combined, these changes give a total performance of around 6 MIPS. Similar changesare made in members of the Winbond family of Standard 8051 devices (see theWinbond W77E58, for example) resulting in performance figures of up to 10 MIPS. 
Clearly, for maximum performance, we would like to execute instructions at a rate
of one machine instruction per oscillator cycle. The Dallas ‘ultra high speed’ 89C420is the first 8051 device to achieve this: as a result, it runs at 12 times the speed of theoriginal 8051. In addition, the 89C420 can operate at up to 50 MHz, increasing over-all performance to around 40–50 MIPS. 
To put these figures in context, the popular Infineon C167 family of (16-bit) microcon-
trollers has a modern architecture and performance level of around 10 MIPS. Clearly,therefore, in microcontroller terms, the performance of many 8051 devices is respectable. 
Memory issues
The second question you need to ask is whether the microcontroller you are consider-
ing supports the memory that your application requires. 
The memory architecture of the standard 8051 is shown in Figure 3.3. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 34
FIGURE  3.3 A schematic representation of the key memory areas on the 8051 family
[Note: that areas shown with dotted boundaries need not be present on all systems and that, as the family of 8051 devices grows, add i-
tional memory areas are available in some devices. Note also that the effective use of the various on-chip memory areas is disc ussed in
ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82].]CODE
Up to
64k bytes
of internal or
external ROM
[more with
bank switching] DATA
incl. BDATA
(128 bytes of
internal RAM)SFRs
(128 bytes of
internal RAM)IDATA
128 bytes
(plus DATA)
of internal RAMPDATA
Up to
256 bytes of
‘external’ RAMXDATA
Up to
64k bytes
of ‘external’
RAM
[overlaps with
PDATA]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 60 ---
STANDARD 8051 35
The first thing to note is that, for the Standard 8051, a maximum program size of
64 kbytes is directly supported. While it is possible to use larger programs by ‘bankswitching’ the memory (a techniques considered in 
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY [page
100]) this technique is complex, less efficient than a linear address space, and can beerror prone. Similarly, the memory available for data is restricted to 64 kbytes. In situ-ations where code or data memory in excess of 64 kbytes is required, use of an
EXTENDED 8051 [page 46] is often a better alternative.
The second thing to note is that Figure 3.3 shows the total memory (both internal
and external) available on all Standard 8051 devices. Where possible, it is better to usea device with all the required memory on the chip, since this can improve reliability,reduce costs, reduce the application size and reduce power consumption. As discussedin ‘Background’, the original 8051 family had up to 128 bytes of RAM and 4 kbytes ofROM available, from data and code (respectively). More modern Standard 8051srarely provide more than around 1 kbyte of RAM (usually 256 bytes), but may provideup to 64 kbytes of flash, OTP or mask ROM (see Chapter 6 for further details).
Availability of on-chip hardware components
One of the main reasons for choosing to use a microcontroller is that it integratesmost or all of the hardware features you require in your application on a single chip.The 8051 family is particularly impressive in this area. There are numerous variantsavailable which between them meet the needs of a huge number of projects, withouthaving to resort to using large numbers of external components. 
Some of the on-chip hardware components available on Standard 8051s are
as follows:
GAll Standard 8051s have at least one serial port available, supporting RS-232 serialprotocols. This makes it easy, for example, to download data to a desktop PC. Wediscuss the linking of embedded and desktop systems in Chapter 18.
GAll Standard 8051s have two or three timers.
G Many Standard 8051s have on-chip ‘watchdog timers’. Use of such components isdiscussed in Chapter 12.
GSome Standard 8051s have on-chip support for the SPI bus. We discuss this impor-tant serial bus protocol in Chapter 23.
GSome Standard 8051s have on-chip support for the I2C bus. We discuss this impor-
tant serial bus protocol in Chapter 24.
Note that many more features are available in the EXTENDED 8051 [page 46] devices.
Despite this variation, the core architecture remains the same and software for one
variant can generally be used without major alteration on another. 
Pin count
All Standard 8051s have four 8-bit ports available, allowing a number of externaldevices to be added. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 61 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 36
Please note:
G Port 0, Port 2 and part of Port 3 are required to support external memory (if used).
Use of external memory therefore has a dramatic impact on the number of spareport pins (see Chapter 6 for details).
G The availability of new ‘serial bus’ standards, like I2C and SPI (see Chapter 23 and
Chapter 24), means that many peripherals may be connected to a device, by shar-ing a bus requiring a small number of port pins. 
Power consumption
All modern implementations of Standard 8051s have at least three operating modes:
GNormal mode
GIdle mode
GPower-down mode
The ‘idle’ and ‘power-down’ modes are intended to be used to save power at times
when no processing is required. Typical current requirements for the various modesare shown in Table 3.1. 
The Infineon C501 is an example of a Standard 8051 device, which offers power-
down modes identical to those available in the 8052 and many other modern devices.The following description of the C501 idle modes, adapted from the user manual,describes these modes in detail. Please note that this description applies equally wellto most Standard 8051s.
Idle mode
In the idle mode the oscillator of the C501 continues to run, but the CPU is gated offfrom the clock signal. However, the interrupt system, the serial port and all timers areconnected to the clock. The CPU status is preserved in its entirety.TABLE 3.1 Typical current consumption figures for a selection of Standard 8051 devices
Device Normal Idle Power down
Atmel 89S53 11 mA 2 mA 60 uA
Dallas 87C520 15 mA 8 mA 50 µA
Infineon C501 21 mA 5 mA 50 µA
Intel 8051 160 mA – –
Intel 80C51 16 mA 4 mA 50 µA
[Note: that figures vary (approximately linearly) with oscillator frequency: in this case, the clock frequency is
assumed to 12 MHz for each device.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 62 ---
STANDARD 8051 37
The reduction of power consumption which can be achieved by this feature
depends on the number of peripherals running. If all timers are stopped and the serialinterfaces are not running, the maximum power reduction can be achieved: the devel-oper has to determine which peripheral must continue to run and which may bestopped. 
The idle mode is entered by setting the flag bit IDLE (PCON.0). Because PCON is
not a bit-addressable register, the easiest way to set the IDLE bit is with the following‘C’ statement:
PCON |= 0x01;  // Enter idle mode
The instruction that sets bit IDLE is the last instruction executed before going into
idle mode.
There are two ways to terminate idle mode:
G Activate any enabled interrupt. This interrupt will be serviced and the programwill continue by executing the instruction following the instruction that sets theIDLE bit.
GPerform a hardware reset. 
Power-down mode
In the power-down mode, the on-chip oscillator is stopped. Therefore all functionsare stopped; only the contents of the on-chip RAM are maintained. 
The power-down mode is entered by setting the flag bit PDE (PCON.1). This is
most easily done in ‘C’ as follows:
PCON |= 0x02;  // Enter power down mode
The instruction that sets bit PDE is the last instruction executed before going into
power down mode. The only exit from power-down mode is a hardware reset. 
Hardware resource implications
To summarize, the Standard 8051 provides the following hardware resources:
G A CPU performance of between 1 MIPS and 50 MIPS (approximately).
GAvailable on-chip memory of up to 64 kbytes for code and (typically) at least256 bytes for data. 
GOne ‘RS-232’ serial port.
GTwo or three hardware timers.
GCurrent consumption of around 20 mA in normal operating mode, 5 mA in idlemode, and 50 µA in power-down mode.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no available figures to suggest that the Standard 8051 is any more (or less)reliable than any other microcontroller family. Nonetheless, there are differenceswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 63 ---
between the facilities provided by the various 8051 family members and the choice of
an inappropriate microcontroller can have a detrimental impact on the safety and /or reliability of your application.
These differences arise simply due to the availability of on-chip resources: as we
have mentioned, these include – for example – different amounts of memory (RAMand ROM), serial interfaces (SPI and I
2C) and analog-to-digital converters. Where pos-
sible, the use of on-chip components generally increases application reliability, for thefollowing reasons:
GWith external components, each of the soldered joints has a risk of failure, particu-larly in the presence of vibration and / or high humidity: reducing the number ofjoints reduces this risk.
GExternal wires act as miniature aerials and increase vulnerability to electromagneticinterference (EMI): as a consequence reduction in external wiring tends to makethe application more robust in the presence EMI.
GWithout external components, the complexity of the hardware design is reduced,which means there are fewer opportunities for wiring and / or hardware design errors, 
As (in almost all cases) the ‘on-chip’ solution will also be both cheaper to produce
and physically smaller, the message is clear: you should generally use a microcon-troller with all the on-chip resources you require if at all possible. Note, however,that use of less common on-chip resources will make your design less portable (seenext section).
Portability
Because of the huge range of different 8051 devices available, design based on theStandard 8051 are inherently portable. However, if you assume the availability ofnon-standard components (extra RAM, extra serial interfaces etc.), your design willnot be as portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
To summarize, the Standard 8051 has the following strengths and weaknesses:
It is a flexible, general-purpose microcontroller suitable for use in many projects .
It is a low-cost device .
It has an architecture with which many developers are familiar .
It is supported by many development tools .
The family as a whole is available in more than 300 different forms .
It is available from a very wide range of different manufacturers: if one com-
pany fails, there will be an alternative source .
Its CPU performance (in some versions) is equal to or greater than many
16-bit devices .HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 38www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 64 ---
STANDARD 8051 39
It has limited memory available (compared with 16-bit or 32-bit microcon-
trollers).
Its memory architecture is comparatively complex.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In this section, we consider some alternatives to the Standard 8051 microcontroller.
Smaller alternatives
If your application does not require external memory and you do not require more
than (approximately) 15 port pins for input and output, you may find that the Small8051s are a good option: see 
SMALL 8051 [page 41].
Extended 8051 alternatives
The Extended 8051s can generally do everything that the Standard 8051 can do. In
addition, they usually have a larger number of available port pins and a wider range ofon-chip hardware components such as digital-to-analog converters, CAN interfaces, SPIinterfaces, I
2C interfaces and so on. The Extended 8051s also, in some cases, provide
support for large amounts of external memory: up to 16 Mbytes in some cases.
We discuss such devices in EXTENDED 8051 [page 46].
The Intel 80251 family
The Intel MCS-251 is both software and hardware compatible with the Standard 8051
family. This means that, in most cases, you can load your existing code into a 251and place this (40-pin or 44-pin) device into your existing 8051-based circuit board. 
It is claimed that performance can be improved by a factor of 5–15 times by
this approach (compared with the original 1-MIP 8051) and that further improve-ments are possible by recompiling and / or rewriting code to take advantage of thenew architecture.
To summarize, the key features of the 251 are:
G Software and hardware compatibility with the Standard 8051.
G 5–15 ×the performance of the original 8051.
G Large (up to 16 Mbyte) linear address space.
G Additional on-chip RAM compared with the Standard 8051 (up to 1 kbyte).
G Other additional components, such as a watchdog timer and a PWM unit.
G Two serial ports in some versions.
Overall, the main advantage of the 251 family is that can provide a more powerful,
drop-in replacement for the original 8051 and that it may be used without purchasingadditional tools (such as compilers). However, the 251 family has not proved nearlyas popular as the 8051 and it offers little that Standard and Extended 8051 devicescannot now provide. 
If you wish to find out more about the 251 family, then Ayala (2000) may be of inter est.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 65 ---
Example: Using the Standard 8051
We give many examples of the use of Standard 8051 devices throughout this book.
Further reading
A collection of data books for a range of Standard 8051 devices is included on the
CD-ROM.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 40www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 66 ---
SMALL 8051
Context
You are developing a microcontroller-based embedded application and have some
flexibility in the choice of hardware platform to be used. 
Problem
Should you base your application on a Small 8051-family microcontroller?
Background
The desktop microprocessor market is characterized by constant demands forincreased power. As a result, processors become obsolete after two or three years inproduction. By contrast, the 8051 architecture is more than 20 years old, yet thefamily is growing in both size and popularity.
This only makes sense because, as we saw in Chapter 1, the driving forces behind
the embedded market are rather different from those of the desktop. In the embeddedmarket, the trend is to exploit the flexibility of low-cost microcontrollers in an everwider range of applications: indeed, as prices fall, these devices are finding their wayinto applications that would have involved a small number of discrete components(transistors, diodes, resistors, capacitors) a few years ago, but which are now imple-mented with microcontrollers. 
To emphasize the very different nature of the embedded market, some of the more
recent 8051 devices – far from being more powerful and having more features thanthe original – generally have fewer features. 
Most immediately obvious is the fact that these Small 8051 devices typically have
20 or 24 pins and only some 15 I/O pins. In addition to their small physical size, theother common feature linking the Small 8051s is that they do not support externalmemory. For example, in the case of the popular AT89C1051, AT89C2051 andAT89C4051, Port 0 and Port 2
1from the original device are omitted entirely (along
with the ALE and PSEN pins, and some pins on Port 3), allowing the number of exter-nal pins to be reduced, in these cases to 20 pins. Similar changes are made in thePhilips 87LPC764 and Philips 80c751 devices (see Figure 3.4). 
Solution
Should you use a Small 8051 in your application?SMALL 8051 41
1. As was noted in STANDARD 8051 [page 32], Port 0 and Port 2 are used to support the address and
data buses when external memory is used. See Chapter 6 for further details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 67 ---
Performance issues
Most Small 8051s provide a CPU performance of 1–2 MIPS (see STANDARD 8051
[page 30]).
Memory issues
A key feature of the Small 8051s is that they do not support a standard external data
and address bus. As a result, the memory map of a typical Small 8051 looks like thatshown in Figure 3.5.
Availability of on-chip hardware components
The on-chip hardware components on Small 8051s vary greatly between devices. Thepopular Atmel range has few on-chip hardware components, while the Philips devicestend to have a very wide range of features, including ADCs and pulse width modulator(PWM)
2units. For example, the Philips 87LPC768 is a low-cost, 20-pin, 8051-based
microcontroller with 4 kB OTP ROM memory, an 8-bit ADC and a PWM unit.
Pin count
Inevitably, Small 8051s have a very low pin count. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 42
FIGURE  3.4 Examples of three ‘Small 8051s’, devices intended for applications where external memory
will not be required. [Left] Atmel AT89C1051. [Middle] Philips 80c751. [Right] Philips87LPC764 (reproduced courtesy of Atmel Corporation and Philips Semiconductors)P3.4/A4
P3.3/A3
P3.2/A2/A10
P3.1/A1/A9
P3.0/A0/A8
P0.2/VPP
P0.1/SDA/OE-PGM
P0.0/SCL/ASEL
RST
X2X1
V
SS121110987654321
131415161718192021222324VCC
P3.5/A5
P3.6/A6
P3.7/A7
P1.7/T0/D7
P1.6/—IN—T1/D6
P1.5/—IN—T0/D5
P1.4/D4P1.3/D3P1.2/D2P1.1/D1
P1.0/D0CMP2.0/P0.0
P1.7P1.6
—–RST/P1.5
V
SS
X1/P2.1
X2/CLKOUT/P2.0
—IN—T1/P1.4
SDA/—IN—T0/P1.3
SCL/T0/P1.2 10987654321
151617181920P0.1/CIN2B
P0.2/CIN2AP0.3/CIN1B
P0.4/CIN1A
P0.5/CMPREF
V
DD
P0.6/CMP1P0.7/T1P1.0/TxD
P1.1/RxD14
13
12
11RST
P3.0P3.1
XTAL2XTAL1
(—IN—T0) P3.2
(—IN—T1) P3.3
(T0) P3.4
P3.5
GND12345678910VCC
P1.7P1.6P1.5P1.4P1.3P1.2P1.1 (AIN1)P1.0 (AIN0)P3.720
191817161514131211
2. We discuss the use of PWM units in Chapter 33.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 68 ---
Where external components must be added, either consider using a Standard 8051
as a replacement microcontroller. Alternatively, consider using a serial bus (e.g. I2C:
see Chapter 23) to connect the external devices.
Power consumption
A Standard 8051 (typically) has a narrow operating voltage range: around 4.5V to5.5V. One important feature of the Small 8051 devices is that they have a very wideoperating voltage range: typically around 3V to around 7V. This wide operating volt-age range makes it very easy to create low-cost, battery-powered applications.
In addition, like most Standard 8051s, the Small 8051s have three operating
modes: normal, idle and power down. Typical current requirements for the variousmodes are shown in Table 3.2. Note also that the power supply is assumed to be 5V.SMALL 8051 43
FIGURE  3.5 A schematic representation of the key memory areas on the Atmel 89C1051 device, a
popular example of a Small 8051
[Note: that the 89C2051 and 89C4051 are similar, but have more RAM and 2 kbytes or 4 kbytes, respectively, of flash memory.]CODE
1 kbyte flash
DATA
incl. BDATA
(64 bytes  of
internal RAM)SFRs
(internal RAM)
TABLE 3.2 Typical current requirements for two Small 8051 devices
Device Normal Idle Power down
Atmel 89C1051 9 mA 1.5 mA 12 µA
Philips 87LPC764 8 mA 4 mA 1 µA
[Note: that the figures are approximate and vary with oscillator frequency: this is assumed to be 12 MHz (in each
case) here.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 69 ---
Hardware resource implications
The Small 8051 provides the following hardware resources:
GA CPU performance of between 1 MIPS and 3 MIPS (approximately).
GAvailable internal memory (typical) of up to 4 kbytes for code and 256 bytes for
data. No support for external memory.
GUsually one, full duplex (‘RS-232’) serial port.
GTwo or three hardware timers.
GCurrent consumption of around 10 mA in normal operating mode, 5 mA in idlemode, and 10 µA in power-down mode.
Additional features are also available on some devices.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no available figures to suggest that the Small 8051 is any more (or less)
reliable than any other microcontroller family. 
Portability
Please note that the Small 8051s have a core architecture based on the 8051 family.However, as is apparent from Figure 3.4, the various Small 8051s are in no sense pincompatible and vary greatly in features and functionality. As a result, code written fora particular Small 8051 is less portable than code written for a Standard 8051.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
To summarize, the Standard 8051 has the following strengths and weaknesses:
It is based on the core 8051 architecture and thus has many of the strengths
of the Standard 8051 .
It has a small physical size .
It is a low-cost device .
It has limited on-chip RAM and ROM memory and no support for external memory.
Designs based on Small 8051s are less easy to port than designs based on Standard
8051s, due to the diverse nature of this branch of the microcontroller family
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The main alternative to a Small 8051 (considered in this text) is the STANDARD 8051
[page 30].
Alternatively, consider one of the microchip family of PIC devices, such as the
(8-pin) PIC12CE673; these have similar capabilities to the Small 8051 devices, albeitwith a completely different architecture.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 44www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 70 ---
Example: Using the Small 8051
We give many examples of the use of Small 8051 devices throughout this book.
Further reading
A collection of data books for a range of Small 8051 devices is included on the
CD-ROM.SMALL 8051 45www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 71 ---
EXTENDED 8051
Context
You are developing a microcontroller-based embedded application and have some
flexibility in the choice of hardware platform to be used. 
Problem
Should you base your application on an Extended 8051-family microcontroller?
Background
As we have seen in connection with STANDARD 8051 [page 30] and SMALL 8051
[page 41], this long-lived microcontroller family continues to thrive partly because itoffers a huge variety of ‘standard devices’ (covering the territory of traditional 8-bitmicrocontrollers) and a range of ‘small devices’ (overlapping with the range of 4-bitcontrollers, and challenging devices such as the small PIC range). 
Both the Standard and Small 8051s are aimed, largely, at low-cost, low-performance
application areas where limited memory is required and the three most important con-siderations are ‘cost, cost and cost’. Of course, not all projects take this form. 
To develop applications requiring specialized hardware or larger amounts of
memory, we can opt to switch to a 16-bit (or 32-bit) microcontroller environment.However, such a move can require a major investment in staff, staff training anddevelopment tools. An alternative is to use one of the Extended 8051 devices intro-duced in recent years by a range of manufacturers. Such devices preserve theinvestment in the 8051 range and, at the same time, open up new application areasto this microcontroller family. 
In general, the extended 8051s offer the widest range of features available in 8051
devices. For example, the Infineon C505C and C515C include a useful range of on-chip hardware components (including in this case support for the CAN
3 bus) that
have led to these devices being used in the vast automotive market. 
The C505C and C515C both retain the memory limitations of the Standard 8051.
By contrast, other Extended 8051s, such as the Dallas 80C390 (Figure 3.6) and theAnalog Devices ADµC812 (Figure 3.7) can access much larger amounts of memory, ina linear address space.
Compared to many 16-bit microcontrollers, the Extended 8051s are, usually, com-
paratively inexpensive: however, they are inevitably more expensive than either theStandard 8051 or Small 8051 alternatives.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 46
3. We discuss the use of the CAN bus in Chapter 28.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 72 ---
EXTENDED 8051 47
FIGURE 3.6 Features of the Dallas 80C390 microcontrollerG8051-COMPATIBLE CORE GHARDWARE MATHS SUPPORT
– 8051 instruction-set compatible – 16/32-bit math co-processor– Five 8-bit I/O ports– Three 16-bit timer/counters GTWO FULL-FUNCTION CAN 2.0B
– 256 bytes scratchpad RAM CONTROLLERS
– 4 clocks/machine cycle (8051=12) – 15 message centres per controller– Runs DC to 40 MHz clock rates – Standard 11-bit or extended 29-bit identification – Frequency multiplier reduces EMI modes– Single-cycle instruction in 100 ns – Supports DeviceNet, SDS and higher layer– 16 total interrupt sources with 6 external CAN protocols– Two full-duplex hardware serial ports – Disables transmitter during autobaud– SIESTA low power mode
GMEMORY
– 4 kB internal SRAM usable as program/data/ GPROGRAMMABLE IRDA CLOCK
stack memory
– Addresses up to 4 MB external GOTHER FEATURES
– Defaults to true 8051 memory compatibility – Power-fail reset– User-enabled 22-bit program/data counter – Early-warning power-fail interrupt– 16-bit/22-bit paged/22-bit contiguous modes – Programmable watchdog timer– User-selectable multiplexed / non-multiplexed – Oscillator-fail detection
memory interface
– Optional 10-bit stack pointer GPACKAGING
– Available in 64-pin QFP, 68-pin PLCC and 
64-PIN QFP
FIGURE 3.7 Features of the Analog Devices ADµC812 microcontrollerG8051-COMPATIBLE CORE GANALOG I/O
– 12 MHz Nominal Operation (16 MHz Max) – 8-channel, high-accuracy 12-bit ADC– Three 16-bit timer/counters – On-chip, 40 ppm/oC voltage reference– 32 programmable I/O lines – High speed 200 kSPS– High current drive capability – port 3 –
DMA controller for high-speed ADC-to-RAM capture
– Nine interrupt sources, two priority levels – Two 12-bit voltage output DACs
– On-chip temperature sensor function
GPOWER
– Specified for 3 V and 5 V Operation GON-CHIP ‘PERIPHERALS ’
– Normal, idle and power-down modes – UART serial I/O
–I2C and SPI serial I/O
GMEMORY – Watchdog timer
– 8K bytes on-chip flash/EE program memory – Power supply monitor– 640 bytes on-chip flash/EE data memory– On-chip charge pump (no ext. VPP requirements) GPACKAGING
– 256 bytes on-chip data RAM – 52-lead plastic quad flatpack– 16M bytes external data address space– 64K bytes external program address spacewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 73 ---
Solution
Should you use an Extended 8051 microcontroller in your application?
Performance issues
The Extended 8051s have good levels of performance. For example, as we have previ-
ously noted, the performance of the Dallas 80C390 is up to 10x higher than theoriginal 8051. In addition, the presence of hardware maths units in several Extended8051s can significantly improve the speed of maths-intensive programs. Nonetheless,the Dallas 89C420 (a Standard 8051) is more powerful than any of the currentExtended 8051 devices.
Memory issues
Some of the Extended 8051s support the use of large amounts of external memory. Ofparticular note here is the Dallas 80C390, the Analog Devices 80µC812 and thePhilips 80C51MX. (See Chapter 6 for details.)
Availability of on-chip hardware components
Some of the on-chip hardware components available on Extended 8051s areas follows:
GSeveral Extended 8051s have on-chip analog-to-digital converters (typically upto eight channels, 10-bit resolution). We discuss the use of such converters inChapter 32.
GSeveral Extended 8051s have hardware support for mathematical operations, ensur-ing that (for example) floating-point maths operations are carried outcomparatively rapidly. See, for example, the data sheets for the Infineon C517,C537 and C509 and the Dallas 80C390 (included on the CD).
GSome Extended 8051s have support for the Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) bus. We
discuss this important serial protocol in Chapter 23.
GSome Extended 8051s have on-chip support for the SPI bus. We discuss this impor-tant serial bus protocol in Chapter 24.
GSome Extended 8051s have support for the Controller Area Network (CAN) bus. Wediscuss the CAN bus in Chapter 28.
GSome Extended 8051s have on-chip digital-to-analog (D-A) converters. We discusssuch converters in Chapter 34.
Pin count
Many Extended 8051s have a very large number of available port pins. For example,the C509 has nine 8-bit ports. Even where external memory is used, six complete 8-bit ports are available.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 48www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 74 ---
Power consumption
See STANDARD 8051 [page 30] for details of the three main operating modes of the
8051 family. Inevitably, given the large number of on-chip hardware components, thebasic current requirements of the Extended 8051s is larger than that of the Standard8051. In addition, if external memory is used, the current requirements are best deter-mined for the prototype circuit.
As a basic guide, typical current requirements for the various modes of some repre-
sentative Extended 8051s are shown in Table 3.3. 
Hardware resource implications
The Extended 8051s provide a range of different hardware resources depending onthe device chosen: 
GIn all cases, the core is 8051 compatible. 
GIn most cases, many additional peripheral devices are included on chip. In mostcases, high CPU performance is available. 
GIn some cases large amounts of external memory may be directly accessed.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no available figures to suggest that the Extended 8051 is any more (or less)reliable than any other microcontroller family. However, it should be noted thatmany Extended 8051s require the use of external memory: this may reduce the over-all system reliability compared to an otherwise identical system constructed usingonly internal memory, for reasons discussed in 
STANDARD 8051 [page 30].
Portability
Because of the huge range of different 8051 devices available, designs based on the
Extended 8051 are inherently portable. However, as already discussed, the variousEXTENDED 8051 49
TABLE 3.3 Typical current consumption figures for a range of different Extended 8051 
devices
Device Normal Idle Power down
Dallas 80C390 13.1 mA 4.8 mA 1 µA 
Infineon C509 31 mA 19 mA 30 µA 
Infineon C515C 24 mA 14 mA 50 µA
[Note: the figures are approximate and vary with oscillator frequency: this is assumed to be 12 MHz in each case.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 75 ---
‘extended’ 8051s share only the common core and are not pin compatible (by any
means). This means that core routines (like schedulers, for example) may be easilyported, but other components will need to be adapted to suit a particular device.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
To summarize, the Extended 8051 has the following strengths and weaknesses:
It is based on the 8051 architecture and thus has many of the strengths of the
Standard 8051 .
It has – in most cases – a large number of external port pins available .
It has – in most cases – a number of additional on-chip hardware compo-
nents available .
It has – in many cases – an ability to access large amounts of ROM and RAM
memory .
Still, essentially, an 8-bit device: for higher levels of performance, a 32-bit device
may be a better option.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
We consider three alternative solutions in this section.
Use two (or more) Standard 8051s
Suppose we require a microcontroller with the following specification:
G60+ port pins
GSix timers
GTwo USARTS
G128 kbytes of ROM
G512 bytes of RAM
GA cost of around $2.00 (US)
We can meet many of these requirements with an EXTENDED 8051 : however, this
will typically cost five to ten times the $2.00 price we require. By contrast, the ‘micro-controller’ in Figure 3.8 matches these requirements very closely.
Figure 3.8 shows two standard 8051 microcontrollers linked together by means of a
single port pin: as we demonstrate in 
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)[page 554], linking the
two processors can be done with a minimal software and hardware load. The result isa flexible environment with 62 free port pins, five free timers, two USARTs and so on.Note that further microcontrollers may be added without difficulty and the commu-nication over a single wire (plus ground) will ensure that the tasks on all processorsare perfectly synchronized.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 50www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 76 ---
Build your own 8051 device
If none of the available Extended 8051 devices matches your requirements, it is now
possible to create your own. Specifically, Xilinx Foundation4provides a comprehen-
sive set of tools for the programming of field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) orapplication-specific ICs (ASICs). Compatible with these tools are a small range of 8051‘cores’ which can be purchased from Dolphin Integration.
5These cores are not cheap
(around $16,000), but they are efficient (one oscillation per instruction) and the useof such techniques allows you to add hardware components to your specializedmicrocontroller, to meet your particular requirements.
The creation and use of such 8051 devices is beyond the scope of the present edi-
tion of this book, but the WWW sites for the companies concerned will providefurther information. To make use of these techniques, you will need some familiaritywith VHDL.
6Yalamanchili (2001) provides a good starting point.EXTENDED 8051 51
FIGURE  3.8 Creating an ‘Extended 8051’ from two Standard 8051sP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
4.www.xilinx.com
5.www.dolphin.fr
6. VHDL stands for VHSIC Hardware Description Language. The acronym VHSIC, in turn, stands for
Very High-Speed Integrated Circuit (programme). These terms originated in a (US) Department ofDefense programme which had the goal of developing a new generation of high-speed ICs. The firstversion of VHDL was released in 1985 and the most recent version is an IEEE standard (1076–1993).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 77 ---
It is worth noting that the availability of the 8051 core in this form is another, very
useful consequence of the fact that this microcontroller architecture is very mature.
Use an XA-family device
The final alternative to the Extended 8051 which we will consider here is the so-called ‘8051XA’ family, from Philips.
When developing the 251 family (discussed in 
STANDARD 8051 [page 30]), Intel
chose to produce a range of devices that was, to a large extent, both (executable) codeand hardware compatible with the original 8051. When developing the XA family,Philips opted to follow a different route. The aim was to develop a new, 16-bit ‘8051’device which preserved source code compatibility with the 8051, but little else.
The XA family has features including dual 16 Mbyte address spaces (code and data)
and fast (hardware) multiply and divide facilities. It also includes dual USARTs, an on-chip ADC and hardware support for the I
2C bus.
It should be noted that very similar facilities are provided by recent Extended 8051
devices and that – unlike the Extended 8051 – the XA family requires that the devel-opers purchase different software tools (compilers etc). In addition, the XA family hasnot proved particularly popular, with the result that tools, and development boards,are not very widely available.
Please refer to the Philips WWW site
7for further details of the XA family.
Example: Using the Extended 8051
We give many examples of the use of Extended 8051 devices throughout this book.
Further reading
A collection of data books for a range of Extended 8051 devices is included on theCD-ROM.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 52
7.www.philips.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 78 ---
Oscillator hardware
Introduction
All digital computer systems are driven by some form of oscillator circuit. This circuit
is the ‘heartbeat’ of the system and is crucial to correct operation. For example, if theoscillator fails, the system will not function at all; if the oscillator runs irregularly, anytiming calculations performed by the system will be inaccurate.
As a consequence, choice of an appropriate oscillator circuit is an important part of
any hardware design. For most microcontroller-based systems, there are two mainoscillator options, each of which is represented by a pattern in this chapter:
GCRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54]
GCERAMIC RESONATOR [page 64]chapter4www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 79 ---
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
When and how should you use a quartz crystal to create an oscillator for use withmembers of the 8051 family of microcontrollers?
Background
Quartz is a common mineral and is the main component of most sand grains. It hasthe useful quality that it is piezoelectric in nature, which means that if we apply pres-sure to a piece of quartz, it will generate an electric current at a particular frequency.In some materials, the converse is also true: application of an electric field will cause amechanical deflection in the material. 
We can use this behaviour as the basis of a useful oscillator by using an electric field
(generated by plating some contacts on the surface of the mineral and applying a cur-rent) to set up mechanical oscillations in the crystal which are, in turn, converted intomeasurable voltage fluctuations at the surface of the crystal. We can precisely control thefrequency of these fluctuations by cutting the quartz to a particular size and shape: a par-ticular form of cut, known as the ‘AT’ cut, is reasonably inexpensive to produce and cancreate high-frequency crystals with good temperature stability at reasonable cost.
To create a complete oscillator, some further components are required. Figure 4.1
shows how crystals may be used to generate a popular form of oscillator circuitknown as a Pierce oscillator.
A variant of the Pierce oscillator is common in the 8051 family. To create such an
oscillator, most of the components are included on the microcontroller itself: thesecomponents are, together, sometimes referred to as the oscillator inverter. The user ofthis device must generally only supply the crystal and two small capacitors to com-plete the oscillator implementation. We discuss this further in the solution section ofthis pattern.
Note that, in some circumstances, it may be preferable to use a complete, self-
contained external crystal oscillator module (based on a circuit like that illustrated inFigure 4.1) and use this to drive the microcontroller. We discuss this possibilityin ‘Reliability and safety implications’.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 54www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 80 ---
The link between oscillator frequency and machine cycle period
When selecting an appropriate oscillator for an 8051–family device, the choice of
oscillator frequency is really incidental to our real concern: the machine cycle period.That is, we are concerned with the speed at which instructions will execute.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, the various members of the 8051 family have different
relationships between the oscillator cycle period and the machine cycle period. Forexample, in the original members of the 8051 family, the machine cycle takes 12 oscil-lator periods. In later family members, such as the Infineon C515C, a machine cycletakes six oscillator periods; in more recent devices such as the Dallas 89C420, only oneoscillator period is required per machine cycle. As a result, the later members of thefamily operating at the same clock frequency execute instructions much more rapidly. 
In general, the improved performance of modern implementations of the 8051 is
‘A Good Thing’: however, in situations where timing is critical, care must be taken toensure that any timer-related calculations are implemented correctly on a particulardevice: see 
HARDWARE DELAY [page 194], and CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255]
for further details.
Why you should keep the clock frequency as low as possible
As a general rule, the speed at which your application runs is directly determined bythe oscillator frequency: in most cases, if you double the oscillator frequency, theapplication will run twice as fast. 
In our experience, many developers select an oscillator / resonator frequency that
is at or near the maximum value supported by a particular device. For example, theInfineon C505/505C will operate with crystal frequency of 2–20 MHz and manypeople automatically choose values at or near the top of this range, in order to gainmaximum performance.CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 55
FIGURE  4.1 A Pierce oscillator circuit, driven by a quartz crystal (adapted from Horowitz and Hill, 1989)JFETC
RCrystalL
Oscillator output
(to microcontroller)Vccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 81 ---
This can be a mistake, for the following reasons:
GMany applications do not require the levels of performance that a modern 8051
device can provide.
GIn most modern (CMOS-based) 8051s, there is an almost linear relationshipbetween the oscillator frequency and the power supply current. As a result, byusing the lowest frequency necessary it is possible to reduce the power require-ment: this can be useful in many applications.
GWhen accessing low-speed peripherals (such as slow memory or LCD displays),programming and hardware design can be greatly simplified – and the cost ofperipheral components, such as memory latches, can be reduced – if the chip isoperating more slowly.
GThe electromagnetic interference (EMI) generated by a circuit increases with clockfrequency. 
0 MHz operating frequencies?
Several modern 8051 family members can be operated at speeds down to 0 Hz: forexample, the Atmel 89C52 device has an operating range from 0 to 24 MHz. Thisfacility can allow significant power savings, through operating the system at very lowfrequencies (in kiloHertz or even Hertz, rather than in megaHertz). We make use ofthese features in 
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER [page 919].
In some applications, even 0 Hz can be useful. At first glance, this may not make
sense: at 0 Hz, the device is not operating and no code will execute. However, indevices designed for low-frequency operation, the system state will be maintained evenif the clock frequency is reduced. This means that the clock frequency can be reducedto 0 to save power. In addition it means that, if the clock temporarily fails (for what-ever reason) and then recovers, your system has a better chance of recovering, too.
Solution
The aim of this pattern is to help you decide if you should use a quartz crystal withyour 8051 microcontroller and, if so, how to connect such a device. This sectiondirectly addresses these issues.
Stability issues
A key factor in selecting an oscillator for your system is the issue of oscillator stability.In most cases, oscillator stability is expressed in figures such as ‘±20 ppm’: ‘20 partsper million’. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 56
In general, you should operate at the lowest possible oscillator frequency compatible
with the performance needs of your application.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 82 ---
To see what this means in practice, consider that there are approximately 32 mil-
lion seconds in a year.8In every million seconds, your crystal may gain (or lose)
20 seconds. Over the year, a clock based on a 20 ppm crystal may therefore gain (orlose) about 32 × 20 seconds, or around ten minutes.
Standard quartz crystals are typically rated from ±10 to ±100 ppm and so may gain (or
lose) from around 5 to 50 minutes per year. Note that this figure also applies to externaloscillator modules. If you require greater accuracy than this, refer to ‘Related patterns’.
Cost issues
Crystals cost around twice the price of a ceramic resonator, with prices linked to thecrystal stability.
How to connect a crystal to a microcontroller
Basic connections for a crystal oscillator are given in Figure 4.2. 
The values of the capacitors will vary, depending on the microcontroller and the
crystal frequency. We will provide examples of recommended capacitor values for arange of different 8051 devices in the examples that follow; please refer to the datasheet describing your chosen microcontroller for further information. In the absence ofspecific information, a capacitor value of 30 pF will perform well in most circumstances.
Hardware resource implications
Use of a crystal oscillator has no direct implications for the CPU or memory require-ments in your application in most cases. However, if you choose to make temperaturemeasurements in order to increase the stability of your oscillator (see ‘Reliability andsafety issues’), this will have a CPU and memory overhead.
Note also that, as discussed in the background section, the performance of your
application is directly related to the crystal frequency. If your application cannot per-form sufficiently rapidly, consider increasing the oscillator frequency. Alternatively,consider using a more modern 8051 design, from Dallas or Infineon (for example)that uses fewer clock cycles to carry out each instruction.CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 57
FIGURE  4.2 A simple crystal oscillator circuit8051-family
microcontroller
GND XTALXTAL
C
C
8. (365 days) ×(24 hours) ×(60 minutes) ×(60 seconds) = 31,536,000 seconds.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 83 ---
Reliability and safety implications
We consider some reliability and safety issues related to the use of crystal oscillators
in this section.
System heartbeat
The oscillator forms the ‘heartbeat’ of any digital computer. If this heartbeat stops,your system will stop. If this heartbeat varies, timing loops, delays, generated wave-forms etc. will vary too. Correct operation of your embedded system relies thereforeon the provision of a robust and regular clock input.
Heart of glass
Quartz is similar to glass in some physical characteristics: in particular, it is fragile. 
If you require an oscillator that will operate in an environment where there is sig-
nificant vibration, then quartz may not be the ideal choice. If you use a quartz crystalin these circumstances, you will need to package your application to avoid vibrationinfluencing the operation of your system.
Time taken for oscillator to start
If the start of the (crystal) oscillator in your circuit is delayed, then the reset cycle maybe completed before the oscillation begins. If this happens, the chip will not be reset.
9
The time taken for a crystal oscillator to start operating depends on its being
mounted correctly and having appropriate capacitors. Typical start-up times are 0.1 to10 ms (Mariutti, 1999).
Using an external crystal oscillator module
As we noted in ‘Background’, it is possible to use a self-contained external crystal oscillatormodule (based on a circuit like that illustrated in Figure 4.1) to drive the microcontroller.This technique has the considerable advantage that the oscillator is guaranteed to start.This can make it a good solution if your system must operate very reliably. 
Connecting an oscillator module is very straightforward. Figure 4.3 shows a circuit
that will work with all members of the 8051 family. Note that, as shown in the figure,pin XTAL1 should be driven, while XTAL2 is left unconnected. 
Particularly where higher clock frequencies (> 12 MHz) are being used, then
modules may improve your system reliability. However, oscillator modules do haveseveral drawbacks:
GOscillator modules cost around twice the price of a crystal oscillator and four timesas much as a ceramic resonator.
GOscillator modules typically draw currents comparable to that of an 8051 micro-controller: 15–35 mA. This may represent a very significant power drain inbattery-powered applications.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 58
9. See RC RESET [page 68] for further details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 84 ---
GOscillator modules are not always easy to obtain in ‘odd’ frequencies, such as
11.059 MHz. This frequency is very useful in 8051-based designs involving a serialinterface, as discussed in ‘Related patterns and alternative solutions’.
Improving the stability of a crystal oscillator
As we have discussed, typical crystal oscillators have a stability of around ±20–100ppm. If we use this device to control a real-time clock we may gain or lose up to 50mins per year: that is, up to ~1 minute / week. This result is not specific to the 8051family: the result of this behaviour is evident even in expensive servers for desktopcomputer networks. By contrast, most ‘quartz’ wristwatches use crystal oscillators,cost very little and keep very good time. This is because they have a sophisticatedtemperature control system attached, which keeps them operating at a temperature of35°C for about 16 hours every day. The temperature control system is your wrist (andattached biological mechanisms).
If you want a general crystal-controlled embedded system to keep accurate time,
you can choose to keep the device in an oven (or fridge) at a fixed temperature andfine-tune the software to keep accurate time. This is, however, rarely practical.Instead, ‘temperature compensated crystal oscillators’ (TCXOs) are available that pro-vide – in an easy-to-use package – a crystal oscillator and circuitry that compensatesfor changes in temperature. Such devices provide stability levels of up to ±0.1 ppm (ormore): in a clock circuit, this should gain or lose no more than around 1 minuteevery 20 years. Such levels of accuracy are adequate for all but the most demanding ofapplications. However, there is a catch. TCXOs can cost in excess of $100.00 per unitand may even cost several times this amount. This price puts them well out of reachof most embedded projects.
One practical alternative is to determine the temperature-frequency characteristics
for your chosen crystal and include this information in your application. For the costof a small temperature sensor (around $2.00), you can keep track of the temperatureand adjust the timing as required. This is the basis of 
STABLE SCHEDULER [page 932].CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 59
FIGURE  4.3 Using an external oscillator module8051-family
member
XTAL 2XTAL 1Ocillator
moduleVccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 85 ---
Another alternative is to use an atomic clock. For example, a caesium beam clock
uses atomic transitions as the reference for a crystal oscillator and can provide accu-racy at a level of a few parts per million million (that is, around 1 in 10
12). This
translates into an accuracy of around 1 minute every million years. Use of such adevice may sound like an outlandishly expensive solution, but you can now accessthe atomic clocks in various satellites using global positioning system (GPS) receiversor GPS chip sets. This is the approach increasingly used by the mobile phone (cellphone) companies that include such technology on their base stations.
Portability
These techniques can be, and are, used with a wide range of microcontrollers andmicroprocessors.
Note that, as discussed in the ‘Solution’ section, the value of capacitors to be used
depends on both the crystal frequency and the microcontroller used. The manufac-turer’s data sheet for the microcontroller will provide recommended values.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Crystal oscillators are stable. Typically ±20–100 ppm = ±50 mins per year (upto ~1 minute / week).
The great majority of 8051-based designs use a variant of the simple crystal-
based oscillator circuit presented here: developers are therefore familiar withcrystal-based designs.
Quartz crystals are available at reasonable cost for most common frequencies.
The only additional components required are usually two small capacitors.Overall, crystal oscillators are more expensive than ceramic resonators.
Crystal oscillators are susceptible to vibration.The stability falls with age.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
An alternative solution
The main alternative to an external crystal oscillator is an external ceramic resonator:
see CERAMIC RESONATOR [page 64].
Using an on-chip oscillator
As we saw in Chapter 3, Small 8051 devices, such as the popular Atmel 89C4051, aredesigned as flexible, cost-effective replacements to discrete circuits (assembled fromtransistors, resistors, capacitors etc.). However, these devices still require externaloscillator (and reset) circuits. As the oscillator and reset components can, together,cost as much as these small microcontrollers and greatly increase the board size, itHARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 60www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 86 ---
would seem sensible to include oscillator (and reset) circuits within the microcon-
troller itself.
This is now possible, with 8051-family devices such as the Philips 87LPC764. This
20-pin device includes an on-board reset circuit (see Chapter 5). It also includes anon-chip resistor-capacitor (RC) oscillator. It can therefore be used without any exter-nal components.
Increasingly, RC oscillators (also known as ‘relaxation oscillators’) are becoming
available as on-chip components. A simple implementation of such an oscillator isillustrated in Figure 4.4.
Other implementations of this simple oscillator are possible using, for example,
small numbers of logic gates. However – whatever the implementation – the problemwith the RC solution is that the oscillator can never be very stable, largely due to thevariation of the resistor values with temperature. This is apparent in many practicalimplementations: for example, the RC oscillator on the 87LPC764 (and similardevices) has a stability of only ±25%. This is not sufficient for many applications: forinstance, if used to generate baud rates for a serial interface, this level of stabilitywould mean that the communication was unlikely to be effective.
Timing issues
Do not assume that just because your microcontroller will operate over a wide range offrequencies that you are free to choose any frequency in this range. The choice of oscilla-tor frequency will have a major impact on any time-related aspects of your application.
For example, you will see numerous designs for 8051-based systems which use crys-
tal frequencies of 11.0592 MHz. The reason why this frequency is used is that, withstandard 8051 devices, this crystal frequency may be easily used to generate standardbaud rates (such as 9600 baud) from the built-in serial port: with other frequenciesCRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 61
FIGURE  4.4 A simple op amp-based RC oscillator (adapted from Warnes, 1998) 
[Note: that other implementations are possible, using, for example, small numbers of logic gates].Op Amp+
–FoutR
R
RC
Fout =1
2.2RCwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 87 ---
(e.g. 10 MHz, 12 MHz) it is more difficult to produce these standard baud rate values.
This issue is discussed in greater depth in Chapter 18. 
Similarly, the oscillator frequency dictates the rate at which the hardware timers in
your application will be incremented. If you need, for example, to schedule a task torun precisely every one minute, this can be difficult to achieve if you have selected aninappropriate oscillator frequency. (See Chapter 14 for further details.)
Note that such peculiar numbers are not restricted to the 8051 family. ‘Quartz’ dig-
ital wristwatches use a frequency of 32.768 kHz, since, by dividing this frequency by2
15, you obtain a 1 Hz ‘tick’ (215= 32,768).
Example: Attaching a crystal to an Atmel 89C2051
Recommended capacitor values for connecting most quartz crystals to an Atmel89C2051 are shown in Figure 4.5.
Example: Attaching a crystal to dual-processor board
It should be noted that most crystals or oscillator modules will drive more than one(typically up to five) microcontrollers. The data sheet will specify this ‘fan out’ value.This can be useful where a multiprocesor design is planned, not least because thismeans that both microcontrollers (assuming they are both 8051s) will always be ‘instep’ (see Part F for further details).
Figure 4.6 illustrates how the two boards should be connected to the same crystal.
Note that the same approach can be applied to any combination of microcontrollers:if the two boards require different capacitor values, then select a mid-range value.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 62
FIGURE  4.5 Connecting a crystal oscillator to an AT89C2051AT89C2051
XTAL 2XTAL 1
30 pF ±10
30 pF ±10www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 88 ---
Further reading
Refer to the manufacturer’s data sheet for your chosen microcontroller to ensure you
use the required capacitor values in your crystal oscillator circuit.CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 63
FIGURE  4.6 One crystal can typically drive several microcontrollersAT89C2051
XTAL 2XTAL 1
30 pF ±10
30 pF ±10AT89C2051
XTAL 2XTAL 1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 89 ---
CERAMIC RESONATOR
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
When and how should you use a ceramic resonator with members of the 8051–familymicrocontrollers?
Background
A ceramic resonator is, like a quartz oscillator, based on a piezoelectric material. Inthis case, the material is (as the name suggests) a form of piezoelectric ceramic.
See 
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] for additional background material.
Solution
The aim of this pattern is to help you decide if you should use a ceramic resonatorwith your 8051 microcontroller and, if so, how to connect such a device. This sectiondirectly addresses these issues.
Stability issues
As discussed in CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54], a key factor in selecting an oscillator
for your system is the issue of oscillator stability. Unlike crystal oscillators, which usu-ally have stability measured expressed in parts per million, ceramic resonator stabilityis usually stated in percentage terms. A figure of 1% stability is common. There are1,440 minutes in a day and a clock based on a 1% ceramic resonator could expect togain (or lose) around 14 minutes every day. Clearly, such devices are not suitable foroperations requiring accurate timing over a long period. Note, however, that if werequire the resonator to form the basis of a 30-second delay, the likely gain or loss is0.3 seconds: this may not be a problem.
Cost issues
Ceramic resonators cost half the price of a crystal oscillator. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 64www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 90 ---
External capacitors
Most ceramic resonators include internal capacitors. They may therefore be directly
accessed to the microcontroller without the need for external capacitors. This makesthem easy to use and can further reduce costs and the required board size.
Hardware resource implications
Use of a ceramic resonator has no direct implications for the memory requirements inyour application. 
Note also that the performance of your application is directly related to the res-
onator frequency. If your application cannot perform sufficiently rapidly, considerincreasing this frequency. Alternatively, consider using a more modern 8051 design,from Dallas or Infineon (for example) that requires fewer clock cycles to carry outeach instruction.
Reliability and safety implications
See CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] for a general discussion of reliability and safety
issues associated with oscillators.
Overall, the ceramic resonator is the most physically robust form of oscillator
we consider.
Portability
These techniques can be, and are, used with a wide range of microcontrollers andmicroprocessors.
Please note that ceramic resonators should not, generally, be used as plug-in
replacements for crystal oscillators: different capacitors (if any) are required for eachsolution.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Cheaper than crystal oscillators.
Physically robust: less easily damage by physical vibration (or dropped
equipment etc.) than crystal oscillator.
Many resonators contain in-built capacitors and can be used without any
external components.
Small size. About half the size of crystal oscillator.Comparatively low stability: not general appropriate for use where accurate
timing (over an extended period) is required. Typically ±5000 ppm = ±2500 minper year (up to ~50 minutes / week). CERAMIC RESONATOR 65www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 91 ---
Related patterns and alternative solutions
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] describes the main alternative.
Example: Connecting a ceramic resonator to an 8051
microcontroller
Many simple consumer applications, where accurate timing is not required and cost is
an issue, make use of ceramic resonators. In most cases, resonators with internalcapacitors are used: the same resonator can be used with any member of the 8051family (Figure 4.7).
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 66
FIGURE  4.7 A simple ceramic resonator circuit, for use where the resonator has internal capacitors 
[Where no such capacitors are included, the ‘quartz crystal’ circuit (Figure 4.2) should be used: refer to the data sheet for y our micro-
controller for recommended capacitor values. Note that it is easy to distinguish the different types of resonator: those withou t
capacitors have two pins (like crystals); those with capacitors have a third pin. Where there are three pins, the middle pin sh ould
be grounded. ]8051-family
microcontroller
GND XTALXTALwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 92 ---
Reset hardware
Introduction
The process of starting any microcontroller is a non-trivial one. The underlying hard-
ware is complex and a small, manufacturer-defined ‘reset routine’ must be run toplace this hardware into an appropriate state before it can begin executing the userprogram. Running this reset routine takes time and requires that the microcontroller’soscillator is operating. 
Where your system is supplied by a robust power supply, which rapidly reaches its
specified output voltage when switched on, rapidly decreases to 0V when switchedoff, and – while switched on – cannot ‘brown out’ (drop in voltage), then you cansafely use low-cost reset hardware based on a capacitor and a resistor: this form ofreset circuit is addressed in 
RC RESET [page 68].
Where your power supply is less than perfect, and / or your application is safety
related, the simple RC solution will not be suitable. ROBUST RESET [page 77] discusses
a more reliable alternative.chapter  5www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 93 ---
RC RESET
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you create a low-cost reset circuit for your 8051 microcontroller?
Background
As discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the reset process which must be com-pleted prior to the execution of any other code requires that the microcontroller’soscillator is operating. To trigger the reset operation, the original members of the8051 family have a ‘RESET’ pin. When this is held at Logic 0, the chip will run nor-mally. If, while the oscillator is running, this pin is held at Logic 1 for two (or more)machine cycles, the microcontroller will be reset. 
Note that, if the reset operation is not completed correctly, the microcontroller will usu-
ally not operate at all: in rare circumstances, it may operate, but incorrectly. In either event,there is usually nothing that you can do, in software, to recover control of the system.Clearly, therefore, ensuring correct reset operation is a crucial part of any application.
Solution
Various techniques may be used to ensure that – when power is applied to your 8051-based application – the reset process is automatically carried out. The most widelyused techniques are based on the use of an external capacitor and resistor: these tech-niques are considered in detail here.
RC reset circuits
A typical RC reset circuit is as shown in Figure 5.1.
The circuit in Figure 5.1 operates as follows. We assume that Vcc is initially at 0V
(that is, the power has not been applied to the system) and that the capacitor C isfully discharged. When power is applied, the capacitor will begin to charge. Initially,the voltage across the capacitor will be 0V and – therefore – the voltage across theresistor (and the voltage at the RESET pin) will be Vcc: this is a Logic 1 value.Gradually, the capacitor will charge and its voltage will rise, eventually to Vcc: at thistime, the voltage at the reset pin will be 0V. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 68www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 94 ---
In the real system, the microcontroller’s input voltage threshold is around 1.1 –
1.3V10: input voltages below this level are interpreted as Logic 0 and voltages above
this level are interpreted as Logic 1. Thus, the reset operation will continue until thevoltage at the RESET pin falls to a level of around 1.2V.
We can use this information to calculate the required values of R and C. To make
this calculation, we use the fact that the capacitor in Figure 5.1 will have a voltage(Vcap ) at time ( t) seconds after it begins charging, given by Equation 5.1.
The Intel 8051 data sheet recommends values of 8.2K for R and 10uf for C when
this form of reset circuit is used. Figure 5.2 substitutes these values into Equation 5.1and plots the result over a period of 500 ms.
When looking at Figure 5.2, remember that all 8051s complete their reset oper-
ation in 24 oscillator periods or less: if we use a 12 MHz oscillator, this is a maximumperiod of 0.002 ms: by contrast, the recommended reset circuit takes around100 ms to complete the reset operation. This may seem like an excessive reset periodRC RESET 69
FIGURE  5.1 An (active high) RC reset circuitC
RVcc
To RESET pin
EQUATION  5.1 The voltage across the capacitor in Figure 5.1 as a function of timeVcap= Vcc(1 – e–t/RC)
Note that Equation 5.1 assumes that the capacitor begins charging at a voltage of 0
and that the power supply voltage increases from 0V to Vcc in an instantaneous‘step’ (rather than a slow ramp): these assumptions, although often made, arefrequently invalid: see ‘Safety and reliability issues’ for a discussion of these issues. 
10. The data sheet for your chosen microcontroller will provide a precise value, if you require it.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 95 ---
but, for reasons discussed under ‘Safety and reliability issues’, allowing approximately
100 ms for the reset is generally good practice.
Choosing values of R and C
If, having reviewed all aspects of this pattern, you have decided to use an RC-based
reset circuit, what values of R and C should you use?
Rather than trying to determine values of R and C directly from Equation 5.1, we can
simplify matters by noting that the product of R (in Ohms) multiplied by C (in Farads)is known as the ‘time constant’ (in seconds) of this form of RC circuit. This time con-stant is the time taken for the capacitor to be charged to 60% of its final voltage. Thus,with a 5V supply and the circuit in Figure 5.1, this is the time taken for the capacitorvoltage to reach 3V and, therefore, the voltage at the reset pin to reach 2V (that is, Vcc –3V): this is still high enough (because it is greater than 1.2V, as already discussed) toensure that the device is in reset mode. As long as the device is still in this mode untilapproximately 1 ms after the power supply reaches Vcc (typically around 100 ms afterstarting: see ‘Safety and reliability issues’), the device will be reset correctly.
A basic rule of thumb, therefore, is that the RC time constant should be approxi-
mately 100 ms and values of R and C chosen to meet this requirement will usuallyensure effective reset operation (Equation 5.2):
A suitable RC reset circuit satisfying these conditions is shown in Figure 5.3.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 70
FIGURE  5.2 An example of the behaviour of an RC reset circuit using standard component values and
an ideal power supply0
00.511.522.533.544.55
100 200 300 400 500
Time (ms)Voltage (volts)Vcap
VresetLogic threshold level
EQUATION  5.2 A ‘rule of thumb’ for calculating appropriate RC valuesRC ≥100 mswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 96 ---
We can summarize the key material in this section as follows:
GA combination of a 10K resistor and a 10 µF capacitor in a RC reset circuit gives a
100 ms time constant. Bearing in mind the general limitations of RC reset circuits(see ‘Safety and reliability issues’), this value is suitable for the majority of 8051-based systems.
GThe standard 8K2, 10 µF RC reset combination gives a time constant of 82 ms: thisis generally adequate.
GValues of 1K and 10 µF (which appear in some books) provide a time constant of only10 ms: these values will not provide a reliable reset operation with all power supplies.
Adding a RESET button
In some systems, it is helpful to have a reset button, to force a hardware reset. This iseasy to achieve. Figure 5.4 shows a suitable circuit.RC RESET 71
FIGURE  5.3 A suitable (active high) RC reset circuit8051 family
member10 µF
10 KVcc
RESET
FIGURE  5.4 A reset circuit (active high) with reset switch8051 family
member10 µF
10 KVcc
RESETResetwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 97 ---
Note that the reset button pulls the RESET pin (assumed to be active high: see
‘Portability’) to Vcc. Note also that this button also discharges the capacitor, ensuringthat – when the switch is released – the proper reset process will be carried out.
Hardware resource implications
This pattern has no implications for CPU or memory usage.
Reliability and safety issues
There are a number of reliability and safety issues related to the use of RC reset cir-cuits. The key issues are considered in this section.
Overall, however, we make the recommendation as seen in the box. 
Time taken for power supply to reach steady state
Suppose you are developing an embedded industrial control system and you want toensure that the system begins operating as soon as possible after power is applied. Younote (from ‘Solution’) that the reset process on an 8051 microcontroller (with a12 MHz oscillator) will take 0.002 ms. You conclude that, allowing a reset period of1 ms (rather than the 100 ms figure recommended earlier) will provide sufficientmargin for error.
Suppose you adjust the values to reduce the reset period to around 1 ms. For exam-
ple, Figure 5.5 shows the result of using a 0.1 µF capacitor and a 6K7 resistor.
This combination of values may, sometimes , work: but in most systems it will
fail. The reason is that real power supplies do not switch instantly from 0V to theirspecified output voltage: in reality, many supplies take 50 ms or 100 ms to reach thisvoltage when first switched on. You need to allow for this ‘ramped’ voltage input inyour design.
If the supply voltage increases slowly, then the capacitor in your RC reset circuit
will comparatively quickly charge up and will simply ‘follow’ the increasing powersupply voltage. As a result, Vreset will be held at Logic 0 many milliseconds before thechip reaches its operating voltage (~5V). Therefore, the chip will only be ready to runits reset routine after the RESET signal is complete and no reset will be performed.Your application will therefore not start correctly.
If you really must have a rapid reset and you have control over the design of the
power supply there are various ways of dealing with this problem. You may, forexample, be able to increase the transformer capacity or reduce the values of these filtercapacitors. Note, however, that tying the operation of a device to a particular 
powerHARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 72
Many of the reliability problems with embedded systems can be traced back to
defects in the reset circuit. If cost is the only concern, consider using an RC reset: if
reliability is a consideration, use a ROBUST RESET [page 77].www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 98 ---
supply will make your system design much less portable. If, to give a common example,
your company subsequently decides to ‘outsource’ the power supplies or to use a singlepower supply across a range of different boards, you can quickly run into difficulties
.
Time taken for oscillator to start
If the start of the (crystal) oscillator in your circuit is delayed the RC reset cycle maybe completed before the oscillation begins. If this happens, the chip will not be reset.
Typical start-up times for crystal oscillators are 0.1 to 10 ms: however, the time
taken for a crystal oscillator to start operating depends on its being mounted correctlyand having appropriate capacitors. These issues are discussed in detail in the pattern
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54].
Handling brownouts and other power disruptions
Potential problems with reset circuits do not, unfortunately, only arise when embed-ded devices are first powered up. Consider, for example, Figure 5.6. This showschanges in the system supply voltage (nominally 5V) in the presence of two prob-lems. The first of these (at time = 4 seconds) is a simple power ‘glitch’, where thesupply voltage drops briefly to 0V. The second problem (beginning at time = 14 sec-onds) is a ‘brownout’ condition: this means that the (mains) supply voltage isreduced significantly for a period of time, but the supply does not fail completely.These types of fault are comparatively common in mains-powered systems.
To ensure our system operates in a predictable manner, we need to be able to deal
with each supply problem. In most systems, the power glitch will not pose a signifi-cant hazard. When the power fails, the voltage drops rapidly (to 0V) and the systemwill stop operating. When the power returns, the system will be reset in the usual way. RC RESET 73
FIGURE  5.5 Using a rapid RC reset circuit0
00.511.522.533.544.55
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1
Time (ms)Voltage (volts)Vcap
Vreset
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 99 ---
The brownout is potentially more problematic. If the supply voltage drops below
the minimum operating voltage (typically 4.5V for most members of the family,although this varies), the microcontroller will stop operating. If the voltage then risesagain, the microcontroller will begin to operate again; however, if using a simple RCreset, the device will not be reset. The results are difficult to predict and the RC resetcircuit is therefore neither reliable nor safe if brownouts are a possibility: see ‘Relatedpatterns and alternative solutions’ for some alternative techniques.
Portability
Some portability issues, related to the different performance of various powersupplies, have been considered elsewhere in this pattern. These will not be discussedfurther here.
Note also that, as discussed in a following example, not all 8051 family members
have ‘active high’ resets: some are ‘active low’. While the underlying principles arethe same, the wiring of ‘active high’ and ‘active low’ resets are fundamentally incom-patible (see ‘Example: Working with active low resets’). 
Overall strengths and weaknesses
RC reset circuits are cheap to implement.
RC resets are well understood and widely used in other microprocessor and
microcontroller systems.
If your system is mains powered and safety and reliability are not issues (and
cost is) this technique may be a good solution.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 74
FIGURE  5.6 Examples of voltage fluctuations caused by ‘glitches’ and ‘brownouts’024681012141618202224262830323436384042444648500123456
Time (seconds)Supply voltage (volts)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 100 ---
If the system power supply characteristics are unknown or vary or are subject to
brownout, the reset operation may not always be effective: RC resets are generallynot suitable for main-powered applications which must be reliable or safe.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The pattern ROBUST RESET [page 77] describes a more expensive but generally much
more reliable reset solution.
Example: Minimal Atmel 89C2051 circuit with crystal and
RC reset
A minimal Atmel 89C2051 circuit, using an RC reset, is shown in Figure 5.7. Please
see the pattern CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] for details of the oscillator circuit.
Note that the Atmel device does not support external memory so that the /EA pin
is not present: see the ‘memory patterns’ (Chapter 6) for details.
Example: Working with active low resets
The reset circuits considered so far have been ‘active high’ in nature. This means thatnormally the RESET pin will be held at a low level (~0V): to effect a reset, the RESETpin needs to be pulled high (~Vcc), while the oscillator is running. 
However, some 8051 devices have ‘active low’ inputs: these can be identified by
the presence of a RESET pin. As the name suggests, these pins are held at a high levelduring normal operation and must be pulled low (again usually for 24 clock cycles) toeffect a reset. Examples of 8051 devices with active low inputs include the InfineonC509, C515C and C517A. All of these are popular and widely used devices.RC RESET 75
FIGURE  5.7 A minimal Atmel AT89C2051 circuit, with RC resetAT89C2051
XTAL 2XTAL 1
30 pF ±10
30 pF ±1010 µF
10 KVcc
RESETVcc
GNDwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 101 ---
Wiring an active low reset circuit is straightforward. Figure 5.8 shows a possible cir-
cuit for these various active low devices.
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 76
FIGURE  5.8 Creating an ‘active low’ RC reset circuitC509,
C517A,C515C10 K
10 µFVcc
RESETwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 102 ---
ROBUST RESET
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you create a very reliable reset circuit for your 8051 microcontroller?
Background
See RC RESET [page 68] for some background material on reset circuits.
Solution
As discussed in RC RESET [page 68], a key problem for the designers of reliable embed-
ded systems is that power supplies are seldom ideal. For example, mains powersupplies can take around 100 ms to reach their normal operating voltage when firstswitched on and may subsequently suffer from voltage variations, includingbrownouts, in part due to variations in the network load caused by other users of themains supply. On the other hand, ‘1.5V’ primary cells (‘batteries’) often begin lifewith a voltage of up to 1.7V and decline to 0.9V or less as they are used.
Although careful design of your power supply can reduce these problems, it is
often desirable to reduce the risks of system failure by maximizing the chances thatyour system will be reset correctly in the event of power supply problems. The robustreset circuits, notably from Dallas and Maxim, directly address this problem. 
These useful devices perform two basic operations:
GWhen power is applied to a ‘cold’ system, they apply an appropriate (active high oractive low) reset signal to the microcontroller for at least 100 ms to allow the oscil-lator (if used) and power supply to reach their operational state.
GIf the supply voltage falls below a preset value during normal operation, thereset cycle will begin and will only end ~100 ms after the supply is restored to thenormal value. This behaviour deals with both total power failures (long or short)and brownouts.
Overall, these devices are very effective and are cheap. Except where cost is the
only concern, they are highly recommended.ROBUST RESET 77www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 103 ---
Hardware resource implications
This pattern has no implications for CPU or memory usage.
Reliability and safety issues
This form of reset circuit is, as a general rule, much safer than any RC-based equivalent.
Portability
The various robust reset chips are generally insensitive to power supply variations
over a wide range: use of such devices therefore tends to make your design moreportable and less dependent on a particular power supply. Most devices are availablewith both ‘active high’ and ‘active low’ versions and are therefore compatible with awide range of 8051 chips.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Robust reset provides reliable performance even with ‘slow’ power suppliesand in the event of brownout.
More expensive than RC reset alternatives.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
RC RESET [page 68] offers a cheaper alternative where safety and reliability are much
less important than product cost. 
In addition, two further ways of obtaining reliable reset behaviour are now discussed.
On-chip reset circuits
Reset circuits are always a challenge with microcontroller-based systems and – nowthat small reset ICs are available – it seems surprising that this circuitry is not simplyincluded in the microcontroller itself.
In fact, in more recent 8051s, such circuitry is included: see, for example, the
Dallas DS87C520 / DS83C520 and the Philips 87LPC764. An example of a Dallas87C520 circuit using internal reset components is given in the following section.
Microcontroller / microprocessor supervisor ICs
The robust reset circuits discussed here are simple, economical reset options. However,in some applications, we require other external facilities too. Maxim, in particular, havedeveloped a range of different ‘microcontroller supervisor’ ICs that include not only theequivalent of ‘robust reset’ circuits, but also have various combinations of additionalfacilities, such as watchdog timers and even RS-232 transceivers. Three examples of suchdevices are summarized here: consult the Maxim WWW site
11for further details.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 78
11.www.maxim-ic.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 104 ---
GMax6330/1: Reset control, plus 3V / 3.3V / 5V shunt regulator. This allows a single,
inexpensive IC chip to be used for both the power supply regulation and reset circuit. 
GMax819: Reset control plus watchdog, plus battery switchover. 
GMax3320: Reset control, plus RS-232 transceiver.
In addition, the ‘1232’ power monitor (available in various versions from both
Dallas and Maxim) combines ROBUST RESET behaviour with a watchdog timer: as we
see in Chapter 12, this is a very useful combination in many applications.
Example: Using the Dallas DS1812 ‘Econoreset’ with the 
8051 family
Please refer to Chapter 26, Figure 26.10, for one of many examples in this book that
use the DS1812 robust reset with the Standard 8051 device.
Example: Using Dallas ‘Econoresets’ with the Infineon
C515C-8E
A minimal Infineon C515C-8E circuit, created using a Dallas DS1811 robust reset, is
shown in Figure 5.9.
Example: Using the Max810M with the Infineon C501-1E
A minimal Infineon C501-1E circuit, created using a Maxim 810M robust reset, isshown in Figure 5.10.
Example: Minimal Dallas circuit using on-chip reset circuit
As noted earlier, some more recent 8051 devices have on-chip reset circuitry.ROBUST RESET 79
FIGURE  5.9 A minimal Infineon C515C-8E circuit, created using a Dallas DS1811 Robust ResetInfineon
C515C-8E
XTAL 2XTAL 1
20 pF ±10
20 pF ±10Vcc
RESETVcc
GNDEA
DS1811www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 105 ---
As an example, we will consider the DS87C520 (see Figure 5.11), whose circuitry
operates as follows. While powering up, the internal monitor circuit maintains a resetstate until Vcc rises above the ‘reset’ level. Once above this level, the monitor enablesthe oscillator input and counts 65,536 clock cycles, before leaving the reset state. Thispower-on reset (POR) interval allows time for the both the power supply and oscilla-tor to stabilize. In addition, if the supply voltage drops during normal operation,power monitor will generate and hold a reset automatically.
Note that this solution works with many of the Dallas ‘high speed’ and ‘ultra high
speed’ devices, including the 80C320, 80C323, 83C520, 87C520, 87C530, 87C550and 89C420.
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 80
FIGURE  5.10 A minimal Infineon C501-1E circuit, created using a Maxim 810M Robust ResetInfineon
C501-1E
XTAL 2XTAL 1
20 pF ±10
20 pF ±10Vcc
RESETVcc
GNDEA
MAX
810M
FIGURE  5.11 A minimal 87C520 circuit 
[Note that no external reset circuitry is required.]Dallas
87C520
XTAL 2XTAL 1
20 pF ±10
20 pF ±10Vcc
RESETVcc
GNDEAwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 106 ---
Memory issues
Introduction
All practical microcontroller-based systems require some form of non-volatile code
memory (to store the program code) and some form of volatile memory (to store dataand the stack).
In many cases, it is possible to create useful applications without adding external
memory devices. The first pattern in this chapter (
ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82]) dis-
cusses how to do this by making effective use of the various memory areas availablein members of the 8051 family.
In some applications, it is necessary to add external memory: the remaining patterns
in this chapter (
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94] and OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY [page
100]) consider how best to add additional memory to your 8051-based application.
Please note that the material in this chapter is concerned primarily with devices
using the Standard 8051 memory architecture. Some of the more recent 8051 devices,such as the Dallas 80C390, Analog Devices ADµC812 and Philips 80C51MX, providesupport for much larger amounts of external memory than was possible in the origi-nal 8051 device: we briefly consider such extended memory devices in this chapter,but – as each manufacturer has an individual solution – we do not attempt to coverthem in detail.chapter  6www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 107 ---
ON-CHIP MEMORY
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you create an 8051-based circuit that uses only internal memory?
Background
Some general background material on memory is presented in this section.
Direct vs. indirect addressing
You will often see the terms ‘indirect addressing’ and ‘direct addressing’ used in dis-cussions about microcontroller memory. Although these terms often cause confusion,they are not difficult to understand.
You will recall that whatever language you write in (for example, C or assembly),
your code must ultimately be translated into machine code instructions that can beexecuted by your chosen microcontroller. This set of possible machine instructions isdefined by the hardware manufacturer. Through this process, even complex state-ments in a high-level language are eventually broken down into basic operations,such as ‘Copy this piece of data from one memory location to another’. These, inturn, are implemented by machine instructions that take the form ‘Move the con-tents of memory address X to register Y’. 
There are essentially two ways in which such fundamental ‘Move’ instructions may
be implemented in microcontrollers and microprocessors:
GUsing direct addressing , the address of the memory location (that is, memory
address X in the last example) is specifically given as part of the instruction. 
GUsing indirect addressing , the address of the memory location is not explicitly
included as part of the instruction: instead the address (of another memory locationor another register) that contains memory address X is included in the instruction.
Since the use of indirect addressing means that two steps are required to find the
address of the required memory location it may appear to be slower than directaddressing. However, universal use of direct addressing in an 8-bit architecture (with a16-bit address space) would mean that all ‘Move’ instructions would need to includetwo bytes of address information, and would therefore take more time to fetch fromHARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 82www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 108 ---
memory. A compromise is thus often made in devices (including the 8051) where a
small area of memory can be directly addressed and most other memory areas mustbe indirectly addressed.
Note that the distinction between direct and indirect addressing also has other
uses. For example, within members of the 8051 family, there is an area of ‘specialfunction register’ memory and another area of general purpose memory. Both blocksof memory are the same size (128 bytes) and both blocks share the same addressrange. On the surface, having two areas of memory with the same address makes nosense; however, in this case, there is no problem. One block of memory can only beaccessed indirectly, the other block can only be accessed directly. As a result, whenour compiler translates a particular ‘C’ statement, appropriate machine-level instruc-tions are selected to ensure that the correct memory area is accessed: in mostcircumstances, this process is completely hidden from the programmer.
Types of memory
On the desktop, most designers and programmers can safely ignore the type ofmemory they are using. This is seldom the case in embedded environments and wetherefore briefly review some of the different types of memory.
First, a short history lesson, to explain the roots of an important acronym. On early
mainframe and desktop computer systems, long-term data storage was carried outusing computer tapes. Reading or writing to the tape took varying amounts of time,depending whether it involved, for example, rewinding the entire tape or simplyrewinding a couple of centimetres. In this context, new memory devices appeared thatcould be used to store data while the computer was running, but which lost these datawhen the power was removed. These read-write memory devices were referred to as‘random access memory’ (RAM) devices, because – unlike tape-based systems – access-ing any element of memory ‘chosen at random’ took the same amount of time. 
Tapes have now largely disappeared, but the acronym RAM has not and is still used
to refer to memory devices that can be both read from and written to. However, sinceRAM was first introduced, new forms of memory devices have appeared, includingvarious forms of ROM (read-only memory). Since these ROM devices are also ‘randomaccess’ in nature, the acronym RAM is now best translated as ‘read-write memory’. 
Dynamic RAM (DRAM)
Dynamic RAM is a read-write memory technology that uses a small capacitor to storeinformation. As the capacitor will discharge quite rapidly, it must be frequentlyrefreshed to maintain the required information: circuitry on the chip takes care ofthis refresh activity. Like most current forms of RAM, the information is lost whenpower is removed from the chip.
In general, dynamic RAM is simple and comparatively cheap. ON-CHIP MEMORY 83www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 109 ---
Static RAM (SRAM)
Static RAM is a read-write memory technology that uses a form of electronic flip-flop
to store the information. No refreshing is required, but the circuitry is more complexand costs can be several times that of the corresponding size of DRAM. However,access times may be a third those of DRAM.
Mask read-only memory (ROM)
A true read-only memory (ROM) would be useless. The most basic kind of practical ROMis, from the designer’s perspective, read only: however, the manufacturer is able to writeto the memory, at the time the chip is manufactured, according to a ‘mask’ provided bythe company for which the chips are being produced. Such devices are therefore some-times referred to as ‘factory-programmed ROM’ or ‘mask ROM’. Factory or maskprogramming is not cheap and is not a low-volume option: as a result, mistakes can bevery expensive and providing code for your first mask can be a character-building process.Access times are often slower than RAM: roughly 1.5 times that of DRAM.
It should be noted that mask ROMs retain their contents even in environments
with high levels of electromagnetic activity. This behaviour is in contrast to some ofthe erasable devices in which there is a risk that data corruption may occur due, forexample, to high UV levels (UV–EPROMs: see later in this section) or strong electricalfields (EEPROMs: see later in this section).
Many members of the 8051 family are available with on-board mask-programmable
ROM. 
Programmable read-only memory (PROM)
The name PROM sounds like a contradiction and it is. This is, in fact, a form of write-once, read-many (WORM) or ‘one-time programmable’ (OTP) memory. Basically, weuse a PROM programmer to blow tiny ‘fuses’ in the device. Once blown, these fusescannot be repaired; however, the devices themselves are cheap.
Many modern members of the 8051 family are available with OTP ROM. 
UV-erasable programmable read-only memory (UV-EPROM)
Like PROMs, UV-EPROMs are programmed electrically. Unlike PROMs, they also havea quartz window which allows the memory to be erased by exposing the internals ofthe device to UV light. The erasure process can take several minutes and, after erasure,the quartz window will be covered with a UV-opaque label. This form of EPROM canwithstand thousands of program / erase cycles. 
More flexible than PROMs and once very common, UV-EPROMs now seem rather
primitive compared with EEPROMs. They can be useful for prototyping but are pro-hibitively expensive for use in production.
Many older members of the 8051 family are available with on-board UV-EPROM. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 84www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 110 ---
Electrically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM, E2PROM)
EEPROMs are a more user-friendly form of EPROM that can be both programmed and
erased electrically. This does not mean they can simply be used in place of RAM for allpurposes, not least because writing to the EEPROM is a very slow process and there isa limit to the number of write operations that may be performed.
Many members of the 8051 family are available with on-board EEPROM. 
Flash ROM
Flash ROM is not only a relief from increasingly long and irrelevent acronyms, it isalso the most civilized form of ROM currently available. As the name suggests, it canusually be programmed much more rapidly than an EEPROM. In addition, whilemany EEPROMs often require high (12V) programming voltages, Flash ROM devicescan usually be programmed at standard (3V/5V) levels.
Members of the 8051 family are now available with on-board flash ROM. 
Solution
The memory map of the 8051 family is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
In order to make best use of the internal memory, or to select an appropriate device
for your application, you need to understand the meaning of the different memoryareas. These are now discussed.ON-CHIP MEMORY 85
FIGURE  6.1 A schematic representation of the key memory areas on the 8051 family 
[Note: that areas shown with dotted boundaries need not be present on all systems. Note also that, as the family of 8051 grows, some
Extended 8051 devices have added additional memory areas.]CODE
Up to
64k bytes
of internal or
external ROM
[more with
bank switching] DATA
incl. BDATA
(128 bytes of
internal RAM)SFRs
(128 bytes of
internal RAM)IDATA
128 bytes
(plus DATA)
of internal RAMPDATA
Up to
256 bytes of
‘external’ RAMXDATA
Up to
64k bytes
of ‘external’
RAM
[overlaps with
PDATA]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 111 ---
The CODE area
As the name suggests, the main rôle that CODE memory plays in your 8051 applica-
tion is to store the program (executable) code. This happens automatically with all Ccompilers. Note that the code is executed ‘in place’ in ROM: it is notcopied to RAM
for execution.
In addition to code, it can be useful to store (read-only) data, such as lookup tables,
in the CODE area. This is often an excellent idea: many 8051 devices have compara-tively large amounts of ROM available (64 kbytes is no longer uncommon), but onlysmall amounts of available RAM (usually no more than 4 kbytes; frequently no morethan 256 bytes). Placing read-only data in ROM when possible usually makes goodsense. 
Using ROM for data tables can also make sense on performance grounds. For exam-
ple, if your code requires calculation of sines or cosines, this can require a largenumber of CPU operations on most systems (typically more than 3000 CPU oper-ations). If you are able to include the relevant results in an array (lookup table), thiscan reduce the CPU load by a factor of around 1,000.
Placing data in ROM is easy to do. For example, using the Keil C51 compiler and
the code keyword, we can store a large array in ROM as follows:
int code CRC16_table[256] = 
{0×0000, 0 ×1021, 0 ×2042, 0 ×3063, 0 ×4084, 0 ×50a5, 0 ×60c6, 0 ×70e7, 0 ×8108,
0×9129, 0 ×a14a, 0 ×b16b, 0 ×c18c, 0 ×d1ad, 0 ×e1ce, 0 ×f1ef, 0 ×1231, 0 ×0210, 
// etc...
The DATA, BDATA and IDATA areas
Up to 256 bytes of internal data memory are available depending on the particular
8051 device that is used. Access to internal data memory is generally very fast becauseit can be carried out using an 8-bit address. 
The internal data area is split into three overlapping areas: DATA, IDATA and
BDATA. We now discuss each of these areas.
Using the DATA area
The DATA area refers to the first 128 bytes of internal data memory. Variables storedhere are accessed very quickly using direct addressing. 
Using the DATA area is the default with the C51 compiler, if – as recommended by
Keil – the small memory model is used. Alternatively, the data keyword may be used
to explicitly specify that a variable should be stored in the DATA area. For example:
char data Input1;
unsigned int data Loop_Control;HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 86www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 112 ---
Using the IDATA area
The IDATA area refers to all 256 bytes of internal data memory (including the 128
bytes of the data area, with which it overlaps). Variables stored here are accessed lessrapidly than DATA variables, using indirect addressing. The idata keyword may be
used to explicitly state that variables are to be stored in the IDATA area, as follows:
char idata Input2;
unsigned int idata Loop_Control2;
Note, however, that the IDATA area is usually most useful as a stack area: in
general, it is better to leave this area free for use by the compiler.
Using the BDATA area
The BDATA area overlaps with the DATA area. Specifically, it refers to 16 bytes of bit-addressable memory in the internal DATA area (addresses 0x0020 to 0x002F). 
Use of the bit, bdata and sbit keywords allows you to make use of this area
and to declare data types that can be accessed at the bit level. Consider the followingexamples:
// The definition of the unsigned character variable Bit_addressable
// – this can take values 0 to 255unsigned char bdata Bit_addressable; 
// The definition of the bit variable Flag
// – this can take values of 0 or 1bit Flag; 
// The declaration of the bit areas in the variable bit_addressable
// – Note use of the sbit keyword (*NOT* bit)// – Note that this declaration does not use any memorysbit Bit0 = Bit_addressable^0;
Special function register (SFR) memory 
As shown in Figure 6.1, all 8051s provide up to 128 bytes of memory for special func-
tion registers (SFRs). SFRs are bit, byte or word-size (2-byte) registers that are used tocontrol timers, counters, serial I/O, port I/O and various peripherals. The port SFRs arediscussed in the pattern 
PORT I /O[page 162].
Note that – as briefly mentioned in ‘Background’ – the IDATA locations 128 to
255 and the SFR area share the same address space. However, memory locations in thesetwo areas are accessed using different addressing modes. IDATA locations 128 to 255are only indirectly addressable and the special function registers are only directlyaddressable.ON-CHIP MEMORY 87www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 113 ---
External data memory 
There may be up to 64 kbytes of external data memory. Compared to the internal
memory areas, access to external memory is slow.
The external data memory can be divided into two areas. The XDATA area refers to
any location within the (64-kbyte) data address space. The PDATA area represents thefirst 256 bytes of this address space. If programmed appropriately, access to PDATAvariables is faster than access to those in the rest of the external data space.
Internal ‘external’ memory
Although it is mapped into the XDATA area, it should be noted that not all XDATAmemory need be physically located outside the microcontroller. In fact, manymodern devices include on-chip XDATA RAM. For example, the Dallas 83C520includes 1 kbyte of such ‘XRAM’, while the Infineon C509 includes 3 kbytes ofXRAM. These areas of RAM are used in the same way as external memory, as we dis-cuss in the section ‘Controlling access to internal and external memory’ below.
Avoiding confusion between the various CODE and DATA areas
Note that many 8-bit microcontrollers have a single (64K) memory area, shared bycode and data. In the case of the 8051, we have up to 64 kbytes of code and 64 kbytesof data available. Because both of these areas share the same address space, the chip(and compiler) need a means of accessing the correct area.
The main way of distinguishing between code and data access is using the /RD, /WR
and /PSEN pins. The /RD and /WR pins are used only when accessing (external) datamemory, while the /PSEN pin is used only when accessing (external) code memory. 
As with direct and indirect addressing, this process is generally hidden from the
programmer working in a high-level language.
Controlling access to internal and external memory
Note that, unlike CODE memory, the state of the /EA pin at reset does not affect on-
chip data RAM which is always enabled and accessible. Another difference is relatedto the way the presence of on-chip RAM affects the external data memory space. ForCPUs with up to 256 bytes of on-chip (IDATA) RAM, the full 64KB external data spaceHARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 88
Most members of the 8051 family operate in one of two modes determined at reset
by the state of the ‘external access’ (/EA) pin. If /EA is held low, on-chip instruction(but not data) memory is disabled and the entire 64KB of instruction space isaccessed externally. If /EA is held high, on-chip instruction memory is enabled. Inthese circumstances, external access to (code) memory will only occur if the pro-gram attempts to access an address beyond the range of the on-chip memory.
Forgetting to pull the /EA pin high is a very common error in single-chip designs
created by developers new to the 8051 family.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 114 ---
is also available. Where devices have on-chip XDATA memory, this will overlap with
any external memory. Note that the address at which any on-chip XDATA memory ismapped into the address space varies between devices. Most chips map this memoryat address 0x00, but some use different values.
Note that these comments do not apply to the Small 8051 devices, which do not
support external memory and, therefore, do not require an /EA pin. In addition, somemembers of the 8051 family (notably the 8031 and derivatives, and some Extended8051s) have no on-chip ROM, so always require the use of external (CODE) memory.
Different internal memory available on different 8051 devices
Examples of the various memory components on a range of 8051 devices is given inTable 6.1.ON-CHIP MEMORY 89
TABLE 6.1 Memory options available on a range of different 8051 family members
Device Basic RAM Extended RAM ROM Comments
(DATA and (XDATA) (CODE)
IDATA)
Analog Devices ADµC812 256 ×8-bit 640 ×8-bit data 8K ×8-bit flash 16M ×8-bit external
Flash EEPROM EEPROM data address space; 
64K ×8-bit external
program address space
Atmel 89C1051 128 ×8-bit 0 1K ×8-bit flash
EEPROM
Atmel 89C2051 128 ×8-bit 0 2K ×8-bit flash
EEPROM
Atmel 89C4051 128 ×8-bit 0 4K ×8-bit flash 
EEPROM
Atmel 89S53 256 ×8-bit 0 12K ×8-bit flash 
EEPROM
Dallas 83C520 256 ×8-bit 1K ×8-bit 16K ×8-bit OTP 
EPROM
Dallas 87C520 256 ×8-bit 1K ×8-bit 16K ×8-bit mask 
ROM
Dallas 80C390 256 ×8-bit 4K ×8-bit 0 4M ×8-bit external 
data address space; 
4M ×8-bit external 
program address space
Infineon C501-1E 256 ×8-bit 0 8K ×8-bit OTP 
EPROMLwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 115 ---
Hardware resource implications
On-chip memory is a net provider of hardware (memory) resources.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 90
TABLE 6.1 Continued
Device Basic RAM Extended RAM ROM Comments
(DATA and (XDATA) (CODE)
IDATA)
Infineon C501-1R 256 ×8-bit 0 8K ×8-bit mask 
ROM
Infineon C501-L 256 ×8-bit 0 0
Infineon C505C-2R 256 ×8-bit 256 ×8-bit 16K ×8-bit mask 
ROM
Infineon C505C-4EM 256 ×8-bit 256 ×8-bit 32K ×8-bit OTP
EPROM
Infineon C509-L 256 ×8-bit 3K ×8-bit 0
Infineon C515C-8E 256 ×8-bit 2K ×8-bit 64K ×8-bit OTP 
EPROM
Intel 8031 128 ×8-bit 0 0
Intel 8032 256 ×8-bit 0 0
Intel 87C51FA 256 ×8-bit 0 8K ×8-bit 
UV–EPROM
Philips 80C51MX 256 ×8-bit ? ? 8M ×8-bit external
data address space; 
8M ×8-bit external
program address space
Philips 83C751 64 ×8-bit 0 2K ×8-bit mask 
ROM
Philips 87C751 64 ×8-bit 0 2K ×8-bit 
UV-EPROM
Philips 87LPC764 128 ×8-bit 0 4K ×8-bit EEPROM
[Note that the recently introduced 80C390 supports external code and data areas of up to 4 Mbyte (each area). Note also that
the 80C51MX data are based on preliminary data released by Philips prior to the first chip release.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 116 ---
Reliability and safety implications
Suppose that we have two identical applications, using (almost) identical software,
but one using internal memory (only), and one using external memory (for codeand/or data). Everything else being equal, it is likely that the ‘internal’ applicationwill prove more reliable. This is partly because the use of internal memory reduces theopportunities for wiring or design errors, partly because of the reduction in externalwires (‘aerials’) makes the system less vulnerable to EMI, and partly because (in theexternal version) each of the soldered joints has a risk of failure in the presence ofvibration and/or high humidity.
In addition, the ALE pin can be a source of EMI. This pin is required for external
memory access but its operation can (in some devices) be disabled, if internalmemory is being used. This can reduce the likelihood that your application willinduce an error in some other part of the application.
As (in almost all cases) the ‘internal’ solution will also be both cheaper to produce
and physically smaller, the message is clear: use internal memory if at all possible.
Portability
In general, the most portable 8051 code assumes only the presence of a small amountof CODE memory (some kind of ROM, say 4 kbytes) and 128 bytes of RAM. Thiscombination is available even in most of the smallest 8051s.
Further memory (typically 256 bytes of RAM) will be available in many modern
8051s. Some modern devices also have on-chip XRAM. However, the more of thesefacilities you use, the less easy it will be to port your code to another microcontrollerin the 8051 family.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Use of internal memory (in place of external memory) can have the followingimplications:
Lower application cost.
Increased hardware reliability. Reduced EM emissions (where you are able to disable ALE activity).In most cases, the available data memory will be restricted.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94] and OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY [page 100].
Example: Internal memory on the Philips 8XC552
As an example of the memory options available, we will consider the Philips 8XC552.ON-CHIP MEMORY 91www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 117 ---
The 8XC552 contains 8 kbytes of on-chip program memory which can be
extended to 64 kbytes through the use of external memory. When the EA pin is heldhigh, the 8XC552 fetches instructions from internal ROM unless the address exceeds1FFFH. Locations 2000H to FFFFH are fetched from external program memory. Whenthe EA pin is held low, all instruction fetches are from external memory. ROM loca-tions 0003H to 0073H are used by interrupt service routines.
The internal data memory is divided into three sections: the lower 128 bytes of
RAM, the upper 128 bytes of RAM and the 128-byte special function register areas.The lower 128 bytes of RAM are directly and indirectly addressable. While RAM loca-tions 128 to 255 and the special function register area share the same address space,they are accessed through different addressing modes. RAM locations 128 to 255 areonly indirectly addressable and the special function registers are only directly address-able. All other aspects of the internal RAM are identical to the 8051. The stack may belocated anywhere in the internal RAM by loading the 8-bit stack pointer. Stack depthis 256 bytes maximum.
The special function registers (directly addressable only) contain all the 8XC552
registers except the program counter and the four register banks. Most of the 56 spe-cial function registers are used to control the on-chip peripheral hardware. Otherregisters include arithmetic registers (ACC, B, PSW), stack pointer (SP) anddata pointer registers (DHP, DPL). Sixteen of the SFRs contain 128 directly addressablebit locations. 
Example: Comparing speed of access to different 
memory areas
Typical access times for data stored in the various memory areas (measured in instruc-
tion cycles) are as follows:
GAccess to DATA area takes one cycle 
[direct access]
GAccess to IDATA area takes two cycles 
[8-bit copy of address to register (1 cycle), then 1-cycle move]
GAccess to PDATA area takes three cycles 
[8-bit copy of address to register (1 cycle), then 2-cycle move instruction]
GAccess to XDATA area takes four cycles 
[16-bit copy of address to register (2 cycles), 2-cycle move instruction]
GAccess to CODE area takes four cycles 
[16-bit copy of address to register (2 cycles), 2-cycle move instruction]
Although these figures are typical, it is difficult to predict precisely how access
times to variables in different memory areas will compare, partly because the resultsvary depending on different compiler options used. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 92www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 118 ---
Example: Making use of internal XRAM memory on the
Infineon C515C
The Infineon C515C is a powerful (extended) 8051 device that we have used in a
range of different applications, particularly because of its good performance and on-chip CAN component.
In addition to the standard (256 bytes) of IDATA RAM, the C515C has 2 kbytes of
on-chip XRAM. 
To use this memory, you need to be aware that (unlike the Dallas 520, for exam-
ple), this memory is not mapped from address 0 ×0000. Instead, the starting address of
this memory is 0xF800. 
If you are using the Keil compiler, you need to provide this information to the linker,
via the ‘Size / Location’ menu item. You should enter the address (start of XDATA) as‘0F800’: omitting the initial ‘0’ causes problems with current versions of the compiler.
Further reading
—ON-CHIP MEMORY 93www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 119 ---
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you add up to 64 kbytes of external RAM to your Standard 8051 microcontroller?
Background
To add external data memory to an 8051 we first need to understand the memoryinterface. An overview of this interface is shown in Figure 6.2 and will be referred toin the discussions that follow.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 94
FIGURE  6.2 The 8051 memory interfaceP2.7 (A15)28
P2.6 (A14)27
P2.5 (A13)26
P2.4 (A12)25
P2.3 (A11)24
P2.2 (A10)23
P2.1 (A9)22
P2.0 (A8)21
P0.7 (AD7)32
P0.6 (AD6)33
P0.5 (AD5)34
P0.4 (AD4)35
P0.3 (AD3)36
P0.2 (AD2)37
P0.1 (AD1)38
P0.0 (AD0)39
P3.7 (/RD)17
P3.6 (/WR)16
/PSEN29Timing and control lines8-bit data bus16-bit
address
bus
Latch8-bit
(lower)
address
byte8-bit (upper) address byte
ALE30Standard 8051www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 120 ---
The address bus (P0.0–P0.7)
For both program and data access, Port 0 is used as a multiplexed address/data bus
that outputs the low-order address bits (A0–A7) and inputs/outputs the 8-bit data(D0–D7). 
The data bus (P2.0–P2.7)
For all external program accesses, P2 outputs the high-order address bits (A8–A15).The same is true for external data accesses with 16-bit addresses. 
Note one special case: Systems that use on-chip code memory and only 256 bytes
of external data memory are free to use P2 for general purpose I/O. 
ALE (address latch enable)
ALE is used to demultiplex the AD0–7 bus. At the beginning of the external cycleALE is high and the CPU emits A0–A7 which should be externally latched when ALEgoes low. 
Note that on most 8051-based systems, ALE is always active, even during internal
program and data accesses: however, on some more modern 8051 designs, it is possi-ble to disable ALE activity if external memory access is not required: this can help toreduce EM emissions.
Note also that, where external memory access is not required, ALE may be treated
as a continuous clock that runs at one-sixth the oscillator frequency. This output canbe used, for example, to control timing in external circuits. 
PSEN (program store enable)
PSEN is the read strobe for external instruction (code memory) access. Unlike ALE,PSEN is not asserted during internal accesses. We consider the use of PSEN in thepattern 
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY [page 100].
RD (data read)
RD is the read strobe for external data access and (like PSEN) is not asserted duringinternal accesses.
WR (data write)
WR is the write strobe for external data access and (like PSEN and RD) is not assertedduring internal accesses. 
Solution
With a basic understanding of the memory interface (see ‘Background’), adding exter-nal data memory to an 8051 microcontroller is easy to do, provided some care istaken in the choice of components (see Figure 6.3). OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 95www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 121 ---
Note that the 74 ×373 and the 74 ×375 are functionally identical, but have different
pin arrangements. The ’375 arrangement is usually easier to wire up. Both latches areavailable in different speed ratings: inevitably, the cost increases with the speed.
Recommended latch and (RAM) memory combinations for a wide range of clock
speeds are given in Table 6.2. These are taken from Dallas Application Note 89: how-ever, latch and memory combinations which will operate with these Dallas deviceswill also work with most other (generally slower) 8051 devices.
Hardware resource implications
Use of external memory has major resource implications: it requires the use of two
ports (P0 and P2), plus two pins (P3.6, P3.7) on Port 3. This reduces the number ofavailable port pins from 32 to 14. See the following for additional comments on this.
Reliability and safety implications
As discussed in ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82], the addition of external memory can
reduce the reliability of you application: use an on-chip solution where possible.
However, as many 8051s simply do not have enough RAM to support larger appli-
cations and you will be forced to use off-chip RAM in some applications. When youHARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 96
FIGURE  6.3 Adding external data (RAM) memory to an 8051 microcontroller 
[Note that, if the microcontroller is not a CMOS device and the memory devices are CMOS devices, you will require pull-up resis tors
(not shown) on Port 0. This is most easily achieved using a DIL (or similar) 10K resistor pack.]Lower Address BusData bus
Upper Address Bus
RAM (64 kbyte)8051
Port 2WRRDALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
0E
WE
A8 – A1574×373/375www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 122 ---
do use off-chip memory (code or data), please note that one of the most common
errors made by inexperienced 8051 developers is to continue to use P0, P2 or P3 asnormal I/O ports when using external memory. This cannot be done (for reasonsdiscussed in ‘Hardware resource implications’). 
In short: if you use external memory, you cannot safely use P0 and P2 for any
other purpose, and you must also take care when writing to Port 3.
For example, any statement similar to this:
P3 = AD_data;
is potentially catastrophic. 
Instead, make use of sbit variables to ensure you only write to ‘safe’ port pins: see
PORT I /O[page 174] for further details.
Portability
Hardware designs for external memory are generally portable. However, if youupgrade from a ‘slow’ to a ‘fast’ processor (or simply increase the crystal frequency)you need to make sure that the external latch and memory components are suffi-ciently fast: refer to Table 6.2 for suggestions.OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 97
TABLE 6.2 Recommended latch and (RAM) memory combinations for a wide range of 
clock speeds (adapted from Dallas Application Note 89)
Clock frequency (MHz) Recommended latch Recommended memory speed
33.0 74F373/375 55 ns
29.5 74F373/375 55 ns
25.0 74F373/375 80 ns
22.1 74F373/375 100 ns
20.0 74F373/375 120 ns
19.8 74AC373/375 120 ns
18.4 74AC373/375 120 ns
16.0 74HC373/375 120 ns
14.7 74HC373/375 120 ns
14.3 74HC373/375 150 ns
12.0 74HC373/375 170 ns
11.1 (11.059) 74HC373/375 200 ns
7.4 74HC373/375 200 ns
<= 1.8 74HC373/375 200 nswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 123 ---
The only way to make your external access design as portable as possible is always
to use the fastest external components available. This approach has cost implications,but, if you are able to produce 100,000 copies of one, generic (fast) board rather thansmaller numbers of ‘slow’, ‘medium’ and ‘fast’ versions, you may find the ‘one sizefits all’ solution to be both a reliable and cost-effective solution.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Many 8051s simply do not have enough RAM to support larger applications:this pattern solves that problem.
As discussed in 
ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82], the addition of external memory can
reduce the reliability of your application: use an on-chip solution where possible.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82] for a discussion on the use of on-chip memory.
Example: Using external RAM and internal XRAM on 
the C509
The Infineon C509 microcontrollers have 3 kbytes of internal XRAM. By default,
XRAM is disabled when the device is reset and the full 64 kbytes of external datamemory are accessible. 
However, if XRAM is enabled, then the internal XRAM and external RAM memory
areas overlap: specifically, in the case of the C509, the XRAM is mapped to the upper3 kbytes of data memory, as illustrated in Figure 6.4.
The internal XRAM is enabled via the SYSCON1 SFR. Specifically, the PRGEN bit
must be set to 0 and the SWAP bit must be set to 1.
Example: Using external RAM and internal SRAM on the
Dallas 8XC520
The Dallas 8XC520 microcontrollers have 1 kbyte of internal ‘SRAM’. By default, this
SRAM is disabled when the device is reset and the full 64 kbytes of external datamemory are accessible. However, if SRAM is enabled, then the internal XRAM andexternal RAM memory areas overlap: specifically, in the case of the 8XC520, theSRAM is mapped to the lowest 1 kbyte of data memory, as illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 98www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 124 ---
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 99
FIGURE  6.4 Adding external RAM to the Infineon C509 microcontrollerLower Address BusData bus
Upper Address BusRAM (64 kbyte) C509
Port 2WRRDALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
0E
WE
A8 – A1574×373/375XRAM
(0×F400 –
0×FFFF)
0×0000
–
0×F3FF
FIGURE  6.5 Adding external RAM to the Dallas 8XC520 microcontrollerLower Address BusData bus
Upper Address BusRAM (64 kbyte) Dallas 8 ×C520
Port 2WRRDALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
0E
WE
A8 – A1574×373/375
Internal
SRAM
(0×0000 –
0×03FF)0×0400
–
0×FFFFwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 125 ---
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you add up to 64 kbytes of external code memory (usually ROM) to your8051 microcontroller?
Background
See OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94] for background information.
Solution
If you have decided that you need to use external code memory doing so is straight-forward. Figure 6.6 illustrates the basic circuit.
The recommended latch and (ROM) memory combinations for a wide range of
clock speeds are given in Table 6.3. These are taken from Dallas Application Note 89.As we noted in 
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94], latch and memory combinations
which will operate with these Dallas devices will also work with most other (generallyslower) 8051 devices.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 100
TABLE 6.3 Recommended latch and (ROM) memory combinations for a range of clock 
speeds (adapted from Dallas Application Note 89)
Clock frequency (MHz) 74F373/375 74AC373/375 74HC373/375
33.0 55 55 N/A
29.5 70 70 N/A
25.0 90 70 55
22.1 90 90 70
20.0 120 90 90
19.8 120 120 90
18.4 120 120 90www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 126 ---
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 101
FIGURE  6.6 Adding external ROM memory 
[Note that, if the microcontroller is not a CMOS device and the memory devices are CMOS devices, you will require pull-up resistors
(not shown) on Port 0. This is most easily achieved using a DIL (or similar) 10K resistor pack. Note also the control of the EA  pin, to
force the microcontroller to retrieve instructions from external memory.]Lower Address BusData bus
Upper Address Bus
RAM (64 kbyte)8051
Port 2PSENALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
0E
A8 – A1574×373/375
EAClock frequency (MHz) 74F373/375 74AC373/375 74HC373/375
16.8 150 120 120
16.0 150 150 120
14.7 150 150 120
14.3 150 150 150
12.0 200 200 150
11.1 (11.059) 200 200 200
7.4 250 250 250
<= 1.8 250 250 250www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 127 ---
Hardware resource implications
As discussed in OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94], use of external memory has major
resource implications: it requires the use of two ports (P0 and P2), plus two pins (P3.6,P3.7) on Port 3. This reduces the number of available port pins from 32 to 14. See thefollowing for additional comments on this.
Reliability and safety implications
As discussed in ON-CHIP MEMORY [page 82], the addition of external memory can
reduce the reliability of your application: use an on-chip solution where possible.
In many cases, adding external ROM can be avoided if you use an appropriate
8051-device with on-chip ROM: see ‘Related patterns and alternative solutions’ forfurther details.
Portability
Hardware designs for external memory are generally portable. However, if youupgrade from a ‘slow’ to a ‘fast’ processor (or simply increase the crystal frequency)you need to make sure that the external latch and memory components are suffi-ciently fast: refer to Table 6.3 for suggestions.
The only way to make your external access design as portable as possible is always
to use the fastest external components available. This approach has cost implications,but, if you are able to produce 100,000 copies of one, generic (fast) board rather thansmaller numbers of ‘slow’, ‘medium’ and ‘fast’ versions, you may find the ‘one sizefits all’ solution to be both a reliable and cost-effective solution.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
If at all possible, use of internal code memory is a better option!
Related patterns and alternative solutions
Before you add ROM to your 8051-based system, think carefully. There are many 8051
devices with large amounts of on-chip code memory available. As an example, Table6.4 shows a selection of recent Philips 8051 devices.
As is clear from the table, 8051 devices are now available with large amounts of
on-chip ROM (and good performance levels). Of course, similar devices are availablefrom other manufacturers.
There are, perhaps, three main reasons for adding external code memory:
GYou need particular on-chip hardware components (e.g. CAN bus, ADC, hardwaremaths) and cannot find an 8051 device that has both sufficient ROM and therequired peripheral(s).HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 102www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 128 ---
GYou require external RAM. Having therefore already created much of the required
external memory interface, you have decided that it makes good economic sense toadd external ROM too, rather than using a device with on-chip ROM.
GYou need to be able to update the code that your system will execute. For example,if your system is running on a comparatively expensive (Extended) 8051 device,you may decide that it will be more cost effective to replace a small ROM chipwhen code updates are required, rather than to replace the microcontroller itself.
Example: Adding ROM and RAM memory
Figure 6.7 illustrates how you can add both code and data memory to your system.
Example: Reducing the component count
If space is very tight and / or you are seeking to improve the reliability of your 8051-based system by keeping the number of connections to a minimum, you have twobasic choices:
GUse a microcontroller with on-chip code memory.
GUse a memory (ROM) chip that does not require a latch.
Option 1 is not always available. For example, the powerful C509 microcontroller
is very fast and has several useful features (including a hardware maths unit compati-ble with that in the 80C517). It does not, however, have on-chip ROM of any kind.OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 103
TABLE 6.4 An example of the available (internal) ROM on various recent Philips 8051 
devices
Part# Flash size Comment
89C51 4K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89C52 8K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89C54 16K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89C58 32K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89CRC+ 32K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89CRD+ 64K Standard 12-clock machine cycle
89CRB2 16K 6-clock machine cycle (12 clock optional)
89CRC2 32K 6-clock machine cycle (12 clock optional)
89CRD2 64K 6-clock machine cycle (12 clock optional)
[Note that similar devices are available from other manufacturers, but the Philips range is particularly 
comprehensive.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 129 ---
To add external memory without requiring the use of a latch, consider using an
Atmel AT27C520 (64 kbyte) EPROM. It has an internal latch, so no additional compo-nents are required.
Example: Adding more than 64 kbytes of code memory
With some recent exceptions (see Table 6.1), the various members of the 8051 familyonly directly support a maximum of 64 kbytes of external code memory. This maynot be sufficient for larger programs or where large amounts of read-only variablesneed to be used. ‘Bank switching’ is one option.
The idea of a bank-switched memory arrangement is, superficially , very straight-
forward. In a simplified arrangement, we may have (for example) eight 64-kbytebanks of memory in the system. Access to memory locations within each block iscontrolled by the usual (16) address lines. To select between these eight memoryblocks, we can use eight additional output pins on the microcontroller to select anappropriate memory bank, as required.
In practice, things become slightly more complicated.First, consider interrupts. When an interrupt occurs, the microcontroller will jump
to a particular address in the current bank. One way of ensuring that this address
contains the relevant instructions is to duplicate your interrupt functions in all thebanks (note that your compiler can usually do this automatically, as we will see later). HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 104
FIGURE  6.7 Adding external ROM and RAM memory to an 8051 designLower
AddressBusData bus
Upper Address Bus
RAM (64 kbyte)8051
Port 2ALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
A8 – A1574×373/375
EAWRRD 0E
WE
PSEN
ROM (64 kbyte)D0 – D7
A0 – A7
A8 – A15
EAwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 130 ---
Similarly, library functions also need to be universally accessible and, therefore,
(usually) in a common area.
The need for duplication can also arise with read-only variables stored in the code
area. Unless you can ensure that these constants will only be called in a particularbank, they need to be placed in a common area.
Finally, the bank-switching code itself must be in a common area.Having addressed these problems, you need to consider what happens when the
chip is reset. At this time, all port outputs are set to 0xFFFF. If a port is being used forbank switching, the port outputs will control which bank of code your programbegins to execute first. You need to ensure, mainly through the bank-switching hard-ware, that your program begins by executing code in the correct bank.
If you are determined to implement bank switching, you need, first, an appropriate
address decoding scheme and, second, a means of implementing a common code area.
There are two basic ways of tackling the ‘common area’ problem. The simplest
approach is simply to duplicate all the common code in every code bank. For exam-ple, Figure 6.8 shows the use of four 64-kbyte ROM chips, with a common area(around 32 kbyte) duplicated in each.
Alternatively, we can achieve a similar result by using five 32-kbyte memory
devices, arranged with one common area and four upper code banks (Figure 6.9).
While superficially more efficient, the lower cost of large memory chips means that
a solution based on one memory chip is most likely to prove cost effective. In addi-tion, because most of the code examples presented in this book make comparativelylittle use of interrupts, or of library functions, the common area required is oftensmall in size (typically a few kbytes) and the ‘duplicated common area’ solution istherefore less inefficient than it might initially appear.
For example, consider that we wish to add a 512-kbyte ROM and 64-kbyte RAM to
a C509 microcontroller. Much of the required hardware is familiar: we have an exter-nal ROM device and an external RAM device, connected to the microcontrollerthrough an 74HC573 latch. This is exactly the same arrangement seen previously inFigure 6.7.OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 105
Health warning!
As these comments should begin to make clear, bank switching is complicated and
prone to error. Even if you know what you are doing, people who subsequentlyhave to maintain the system you create may not fully understand the consequencesof any changes they make to the code. 
If possible, avoid bank switching. If your application requires more than 64
kbytes of code memory, a much better solution is to use a Dallas 80C390, AnalogDevices ADµC812 or Philips 8051MX, all of which support more than 64 kbytes ofcode memory. Alternatively, consider one of the two ‘upgrade’ paths from the 8051(viz, the 80251, the 8051XA) discussed in Chapter 3.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 131 ---
Where the hardware differs is first, of course, in the size of the code memory area
and, second, the presence of the 74HC257. The 74HC257 is a (quad) 2-line to 1-linedata multiplexer: it provides the necessary ‘glue logic’, to interface the port pins(lower nybble of Port 3 in this example: any available port may be used).
Details of the 74HC257 connection are given in Figures 6.10 and 6.11.Note that the Keil compiler provides support for bank switching and will support
the memory arrangement shown here: see the Banker / Linker manual for details.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 106
FIGURE  6.8 Bank switching with four 64-kbyte ROM chipCode
bank
1
Common
areaCode
bank
0
Common
areaCode
bank
2
Common
areaCode
bank
3
Common
area0×FFFF
0×0000
FIGURE  6.9 Bank switching with five 32-kbyte ROM chipsCode
bank
1Code
bank
0Code
bank
2
Common
areaCode
bank
30×FFFF
0×0000www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 132 ---
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 107
FIGURE  6.10 Adding a 512-kbyte ROM to an 8051 design
[The hardware in this example is adapted from Infineon Application Note AP0824.]Lower
AddressBusData bus
Middle Address Bus
ROM (512 kbyte)8051
Port 2ALEPort 0D0 – D7
A0 – A7
A8 – A1474×373/375
EA PSEN
RAM (64 kbyte)D0 – D7
A0 – A7
A8 – A15
0EPort 3
(3.0
–3.3)A8 – A1474HC257A15
Upper
AddressBus
0E WE RD WR
FIGURE  6.11 Details of the 74HC257 connection in Figure 6.10
74HC257A15 1Y
A16 2Y
A17 3Y
A185 4Y1B
2A
2B
3A
3B
4A
4BP1.0
P1.1
P1.2
P1.31ASELECT P2.7www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 133 ---
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 108www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 134 ---
Driving DC Loads
Introduction
The port pins on a typical microcontroller can be set at values of either 0V or 5V (or,
in a 3V system, 0V and 3V) under software control. Each pin can typically sink (orsource) a current of around 10 mA. In this chapter, we are concerned with hardwaredesigns that will allow us to control a range of low- and high-power, direct current(DC) loads via these pins. 
With care, the port may be used directly to drive low-power DC loads, such as LEDs
(see 
NAKED LED [page 110]) or, for example, small warning buzzers (see NAKED LOAD
[page 115]). However, while a limited number of such loads may be connecteddirectly to the port, connecting, say, eight LEDs will generally exceed the total port ormicrocontroller capacity. In these circumstances, use of an IC-based buffer circuit canbe a cost-effective solution: see 
IC BUFFER [page 118]. Indeed, even with small loads,
the reliability of the application may be improved through the use of such a buffer.
Of course, many output devices require a higher voltage and a far greater power
output than the naked ports can provide. For example, to drive even a small DC motormay require up to 1A of current at 12V. To control such devices, we need to provideappropriate driver (or interface) circuit to convert the microcontroller output to anappropriate level. We will consider three ways of driving such loads in this chapter:
GUsing bipolar-junction transistors (see BJT DRIVER [page 124])
GUsing a driver IC (see IC DRIVER [page 134])
GUsing ‘metal oxide silicon field effect transistors’ (see MOSFET DRIVER [page 139])chapter 7
Please note that in this chapter our concern will be with hardware details of the
interface only. In PORT I /O[page 174] we consider software suitable for controlling
such hardware.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 135 ---
NAKED LED
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
What is the cheapest way of driving a small number of LEDs with a microcontroller?
Background
Even in the most basic application, the presence of a constant red or green outputfrom a light-emitting diode (LED) is reassuring, implying that the application is atleast powered. In other applications requiring numerical outputs, LEDs are groupedinto seven- or eight-segment combinations
12to display, for example, the current
time, the voltage or the number of calls received by a telephone answering machine(‘voice mail’) system. Overall, LEDs are the most widely used components in userinterfaces for embedded systems. 
Given the name it is hardly surprising that, electrically, an individual LED operates
as a diode. LEDs have a forward voltage drop of about 2V , and typically require a cur-rent of around 5–15 mA for a bright display (Figure 7.1). Note that the forwardvoltage required to ‘switch on’ a conventional (silicon) diode is around 0.7 V: the dif-ference arises because LEDs are generally manufactured from gallium arsenidephosphide (see Horowitz and Hill, 1989, for further details).
Solution
The focus in this pattern is on low-cost techniques for driving LEDs.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 110
Figure 7.1 Lighting a single LED2v Anode (+)
0v Cathode (–)5–15 mA
12. Multi-segment LEDs are considered in MX LED DISPLAY [page 450].www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 136 ---
Driving single LEDs
It is possible to drive small single LEDs directly from the port pins, as illustrated in
Figure 7.2. Note that we usually need a resistor in series with the LED, between thesupply and the port pin. This resistor is required to limit the current flow to the portwhen the LED is ‘switched on’. 
To understand why this resistor is necessary, you need to remember that – as we
discussed in ‘Background’ – the voltage drop across the LED will be around 2V.Assuming Vcc is 5V , then the voltage drop across the resistor and diode, when theport pin is at 0V , will be around 5V. Thus, the voltage drop across the resistor needs tobe 3V. If there is no resistor, then we need to drop 3V across a stretch of wire: this cancause a very strong current to flow (limited only by the supply capacity), which willalmost instantly destroy the port, the LED and, possibly, the whole microcontroller.
The equation in Figure 7.2 (essentially Ohm’s law) shows how to calculate the
required resistor (R) value. Typical values of the required parameters are as follows: 
GSupply voltage, Vcc= 5V
GLED forward voltage, Vdiode= 2V
GRequired diode current, Idiode= 10 mA (note that the data sheet for your chosen
LED will provide this information)
This gives a required R value of 300 Ω.
Use of pull-up resistors
Throughout this chapter, we will present examples of driver circuits like that shown
in Figure 7.2.
This circuit will only work on port pins where the microcontroller has an internal
pull-up resistor: this applies to most ports on the 8051 family, with the exception ofPort 0. In addition, some other members of the 8051 family – notably the Atmel89Cx051 devices – have small numbers of pins without internal pull-ups. NAKED LED 111
Figure 7.2 Connecting a single LED directly to a microcomputer port
[Note: When calculating the required value of Rled, the resistance values are in ohms, voltages in volts and current  in amps.]RledVcc
8051 devicePX.Y
Logic 0 (0v)
to light LEDRled =VCC – Vdiode
Idiodewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 137 ---
To adapt circuits such as that shown in Figure 7.2 for use on pins without internal
pull-up resistors is straightforward: you simply need to add an external pull-up resis-tor, as illustrated in Figure 7.3. The value of the pull-up resistor should be between 1Kand 10K. This requirement applies to all of the examples in this book.
In the unlikely event that you do not know whether a drive circuit will be used on
a port with pull-up resistors, the best solution is to include 10K resistors in your cir-cuit. If the port pin used already contains pull-ups, the extra resistor will have nodiscernible impact on the operation of the circuit.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety implications
There are several reliability implications involved in the use of this pattern.
Connecting up LEDs
If you connect ordinary LEDs to a port, do not omit the resistor! The resulting highcurrent flows may not cause the system to fail immediately, but will greatly reducethe life of the port pin and, potentially, the whole processor.
Note: There are ‘5V’ LEDs available, at higher cost: these include series resistors.
Provided they have suitable current requirements, they may be safely connecteddirectly to the port pins.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 112
FIGURE  7.3 Using a pull-up resistorRledVcc
8051 devicePX.Y
Logic 0
to light LEDRpull-up
Should you use a buffer?
Where more than two LEDs are connected to a single port, buffering is almost
always essential, because – while the limit for an individual port pin may be (say) 10mA – the port as a whole may have a limit of 20 mA or less. This issue is discussed in
IC BUFFER [page 118].www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 138 ---
NAKED LED 113
Use of LEDs as warning devices
LEDs (particularly flashing LEDs) are frequently used as warning devices. Bear in mind
that in bright sunlight, such warnings will be barely visible and that blind or partiallysighted people will never be able to see them. Adding an additional or alternativeaudible output may be appropriate in some systems.
General use of LEDs
LEDs consume large amounts of power (compared, for example, to liquid crystaldisplays) and need to be used with care in many battery-powered designs.
Portability
The circuits presented here can be used with almost all microcontrollers and micro-processors. Please note, however, that most of the circuits we present for driving DCand AC loads involve some form of current ‘sink’, as in Figure 7.2. Here, the currentflows ‘in to’ the processor port. This is despite the fact that most microcontrollerports, manufactured using some form of MOS technology, can also ‘source’ current,so that the load could be arranged as illustrated in Figure 7.4.
However, some of the other circuits used as buffers or drivers may use different
manufacturing processes, including TTL technology. TTL devices can sink current inmuch the same way as MOS devices, but are poor current sources. As a result, hard-ware designs based on current sinking are generally more portable (across differentlogic families) than designs based on current sourcing and, for this reason, will beused throughout this pattern collection.
FIGURE  7.4 Connecting a single LED directly to a processor port
[Note: Here the port acts as a current source. See text for details and for a discussion of the drawbacks of this approach.]8051 devicePX.YLogic 1 (assumed Vcc) to light LED
R
R =VCC – Vdiode
Idiodewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 139 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
This pattern allows small numbers of LEDs to be driven from a microcon-
troller port with a minimum of external hardware.
This is a low-cost solution.Only applicable for small numbers of LEDs (typically two per port), otherwise a
buffer will be required: see 
IC BUFFER [page 118].
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See PORT I /O[page 174] for software details.
See the remaining patterns in this chapter for techniques suitable for driving
higher powered loads.
Example: Using low-current LEDs
To emphasize that all rules can be broken, we will consider in this example how youcan connect eight ‘naked’ LEDs to the port of an 8051 microcontroller without usinga buffer (see Figure 7.5). 
Of course, for the reasons outlined in this pattern, it is not possible to connect up
‘normal’ (~10 mA) LEDs in this way without exceeding the current capacity of theport: however, if we use low-current (2 mA) LEDs, then – with most 8051 microcon-trollers – this is possible. 
Here, the required resistor values are calculated as follows:
V
cc– Vdiode5V – 2V
Rled=                   =                 = 1.5 KΩ
Idiode0.002 A
Note that you get ‘nothing for nothing’ in this world: the 2 mA LEDs will not be as
bright as 10 mA or 20 mA LEDs.
Further reading
Horowitz, P. and Hill, W. (1989) The Art of Electronics , 2nd edn, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 114
FIGURE  7.5 Using low-current ‘naked’ LEDs1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω 1.5K Ω
8051 devicePort X
PX.0 PX.1 PX.2 PX.3 PX.4 PX.5 PX.6 PX.7Vccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 140 ---
NAKED LOAD
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you connect a piece of low-voltage ( ≤5V), low-power ( ≤100 mW) DC equip-
ment to one of the port pins on your (8051-based) application?
Background
See NAKED LED [page 110] for general background material.
Solution
In NAKED LED [page 110] we considered how to connect an LED to a port pin of an
8051 microcontroller. In this pattern we consider a more general situation where wewish to control any small DC ‘load’ (Figure 7.6).
This shows a general (unspecified) load connected to the port pin. The main difference between the general load and the LED is that the required
voltage drop across the load will (typically) be 5V (in a 5V system: 3V in a 3V system),NAKED LOAD 115
FIGURE  7.6 Driving a low-power load without using a buffer8051 devicePX.Y
Logic 0 (0V)
to drive LEDR
R =VCC – Vload
IloadLoadVccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 141 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 116
rather than the 2V seen in the case of LEDs. In these circumstances, the resistor may
be omitted, since the required resistance value will be:
5.0V– 5.0 VR= []= 0ΩIload
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety implications
IC BUFFER [page 107] discusses techniques for buffering LEDs and other small loads.
This can increase the reliability of some applications. 
Portability
All microcontrollers can control small loads in this way.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
The techniques discussed in this pattern allow small loads to be driven froma microcontroller port with a minimum of external hardware.
This is a low-cost solution.Only applicable for small loads (and small numbers of very small loads), other-
wise a buffer will be required: see
IC BUFFER [page 118].
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See PORT I /O[page 174] for software details.
See the pattern IC BUFFER [page 118] for techniques suitable for driving two or
more small loads from a single microcontroller.
See the patterns BJT DRIVER [page 124], IC DRIVER [page 134] and MOSFET DRIVER
[page 139] for techniques suitable for driving higher powered DC loads.
Example: Buzzer
A range of piezoelectric buzzers are available that generate very loud (~70 dB) tones atmicrocontroller port voltages (they will operate from 3V to 12V) and currents (theyrequire around 3 mA). These make excellent warning devices, even in battery-powered applications (see Figure 7.7).
As we discussed in ‘Solution’, this 5V load requires no series resistor.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 142 ---
Further reading
Horowitz, P. and Hill, W. (1989) The Art of Electronics , 2nd edn, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.NAKED LOAD 117
FIGURE  7.7 Connecting a buzzer directly to a microcontroller port8051 devicePX.Y
Logic 0 (0V) to sound buzzerVcc
Piezoelectric
buzzerwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 143 ---
IC BUFFER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you safely control one or more small, low-power DC loads from a singlemicrocontroller port?
Background
Suppose we try to control eight 10 mA LEDs from a single port using the techniques
discussed in NAKED LED [page 110]. Figure 7.8 illustrates one way in which we might
try to achieve this. 
In almost all circumstances, this approach will fail. As discussed in NAKED LED , the
various members of the 8051 family can typically sink or source around 10 mA of cur-rent per port pin. This figure does not, however, give the whole story. Take one familymember as an example. The Atmel 89C52 is a modern ‘standard’ 8051 device(40 pins, 4 ports), which is used in various examples throughout this book. It can sinkup to 10 mA per port pin. However, in total, P0 can sink only 26 mA (over all port
pins) and P1, P2 and P3 can only each sink a total of 15 mA. Overall, at most, thewhole chip can sink only 71 mA. HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 118
FIGURE  7.8 Attempting to drive eight LEDs directly from a microcontroller port
[Note: IN MOST CASES, UNLESS YOU USE LOW-CURRENT (~1 mA) LEDs, THIS WILL DESTROY THE PORT (and often the microcontroller
too). ]RledRledRledRledRledRledRledRled
8051 devicePort X
PX.0 PX.1 PX.2 PX.3 PX.4 PX.5 PX.6 PX.7Vccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 144 ---
Although the various 8051 family members vary, these figures are representative of
those found in many devices. As a result, circuits like that shown in Figure 7.8 – whichrequire a total current flow of around 80 mA for typical LEDs – cannot generally be used. 
Solution
As discussed in ‘Background’, buffers can be needed if we need to drive multiple low-power loads from one microcontroller. Even where the ports can drive loads directly,we can both reduce the risk of damage to the ports and safeguard the application as awhole by using an IC buffer between the microcomputer and the load. 
We consider, first, some of the many ICs that may be used as buffers and, second,
the need for pull-up resistors at the buffer outputs.
Finding an IC
Various ICs can be used as buffers in this way. Suitable inverters are readily and verycheaply available: six are packaged together, for example, in the ubiquitous 74 ×04
(Figure 7.9). 
An alternative to the 74 ×04 is the inverting (74 ×240) and non-inverting (74 ×241)
buffers that come in packages of eight (see Figures 7.10 and 7.11). These are particu-larly useful when buffering a whole port.IC BUFFER 119
FIGURE  7.9 Pinout of the 74x04 inverter and corresponding logic diagram (positive logic). 
(Reproduced courtesy of Texas Instruments)
[Note: that each chip contains six independent inverters.]AY1A
1Y
2A
2Y
3A
3Y
GND1234567V
CC
6A
6Y5A5Y4A4Y14
13121110
98
FIGURE  7.10 Pinout and logic diagram of the 74x240 inverting buffer (reproduced courtesy of Texas
Instruments)
[Note: that each chip contains eight buffers, arranged in two groups of four (Group 1, Group 2). The buffers are all tri-state devic es
and, for use as a simple buffer, the gates must be enabled (in the case of Group 1) by applying a low (~0V) input to Gate 1 or (in the
case of Group 2) Gate 2. ]19
11
13
15
172OE–—
2A1
2A22A3
2A48
7
5
32Y1
2Y21Y32Y41
24
6
81OE–—
1A1
1A21A3
1A418
16
14
121Y1
1Y21Y31Y41OE
1A1
2Y4
1A2
2Y3
1A3
2Y2
1A4
2Y1
GND12345678910V
CC
2OE
1Y12A41Y22A31Y32A21Y42A120
191817161514131211www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 145 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 120
Note that these buffers are all members of the ‘74’ series of ICs. All these 74x
buffers can handle currents of 20 mA per pin. The total current per device is 70 mA inthe case of the 240/241/244 devices and 50 mA for the 04. If your load satisfies the 20mA per pin requirement but not the ‘per device’ requirement, you will need to usemore than one buffer chip.
All these buffers operate reasonably rapidly, with a maximum delay of about 1 µs.
Logic families
The various ‘74’ series buffers just described are available in numerous versions,
including ‘LS’ (the 74LS04 etc.), ‘ALS’, ‘HC’, HCT, VHCT, AHC, AHCT and so on. Thedifferent versions have different switching speeds, power consumption, operatingvoltages and prices. In gener al, you can choose any buffer that matches the needs of
your project.
Despite the vast range of ‘74’ buffers available there are only two logic families:
CMOS and TTL. The CMOS devices generally have a ‘C’ somewhere in the name (e.g.74HC04) while the TTL devices generally have an ‘S’ somewhere in the name (e.g.74ALS04). You need to be aware of the differences between these two families.
The original 5V TTL family dates from around 1964. It has undergone various
improvements and is still widely used. Its main advantage is that it is fast; its maindisadvantage is that it has comparatively high power consumption figures.
The main competitor to TTL is the CMOS family. The 5V CMOS dates back
to around 1983 and it too has undergone various improvements. Its main advantageis low power consumption and – in recent devices – speed has been greatly improved.It seems likely that CMOS logic families will come to replace TTL logic over the nextfew years.FIGURE  7.11 Pinouts of the 74x241 and 74x244 non-inverting buffers (reproduced courtesy of Texas
Instruments)
[Note: that, like the 240, each chip contains eight buffers, arranged in two groups of 4 (Group 1, Group 2). The buffers are all tri -state
devices and, for use as a simple buffer, the gates must be enabled (in the case of Group 1) by applying a low (~0V) input to Ga te 1, or (in
the case of Group 2), by applying a high (~5V) input to Gate 2.]19
11
13
15
172OE–—
2A1
2A22A3
2A48
7
5
32Y1
2Y21Y32Y41
24
6
81OE–—
1A1
1A21A3
1A418
16
14
121Y1
1Y21Y31Y41–– –OE
1A1
2Y4
1A2
2Y3
1A3
2Y2
1A4
2Y1
GND12345678910V
CC
2OE
1Y12A41Y22A31Y32A21Y42A120
191817161514131211www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 146 ---
Any 8051 microcontroller can drive a buffer made from TTL or CMOS logic with-
out difficulty. However, there are differences in the buffer outputs depending on thetechnology used; these differences are important:
GWith (5V) TTL, the Logic 0 output is in the range 0 to 1.5V; the Logic 1 output is
3.5 to 5V.
GWith (5V) CMOS, the Logic 0 output is ~0V; the Logic 1 output is ~5V.
These differences have significant implications. For example, consider that we wish
to use a CMOS logic gate to buffer an LED output (Figure 7.12). This approach worksvery effectively, because of the large, fixed voltage swing; however, consider the samebuffer implemented using a TTL buffer (Figure 7.13).
In Figure 7.13 we show that the TTL buffer has two disadvantages. First, we need a
pull-up resistor (the usual 5K–10K value) to pull the ‘high’ output to 5V. Second, the‘low’ output varies, in a range from 0 to 1.5V. This makes it very difficult to choose anappropriate value of resistor to ensure that we have a bright display and – at the sametime – do not exceed the buffer or LED current capacity.IC BUFFER 121
FIGURE  7.12 Using a CMOS bufferR5V
8051 devicePin X.Y
Buffer
(CMOS)Low output = 0V LED is (fully) ON
High output = 5V LED is OFF
FIGURE  7.13 Using a TTL bufferR5V
8051 devicePin X.YRpull-upBuffer
(TTL)Low output = ~1V LED is ON
High output = 5V LED is OFFwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 147 ---
Using pull-up resistors at the buffer inputs
As usual, if working with port pins that do not have internal pull-up resistors, you
need to include such resistors (10K will do) at the input to the IC buffer, whatever
kind of logic you are using.
See NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety implications
A key design decision to be made when driving a small output device is whether ornot to use a buffer. 
In some circumstances, omitting the buffer can make your system potentially less
safe. For example, if you have an LED accessible at the front of an embedded applica-tion, someone wishing to interfere with the system may try to apply a high voltageacross this LED or to damage it physically. If the LED is connected directly to a portpin, then it may be possible to damage the microcontroller itself through damage tothe LED: if there is a suitable buffer between the LED and the microcontroller, it ismuch less likely that any damage to the microcontroller will be possible.
Use of a buffer will increase production costs. However, if there is any possibility of
the output device suffering damage while the product is in use, a buffer may be agood option: it is almost always cheaper to replace a blown buffer (~$0.10) than it isto replace a blown microcontroller (~$1.00+). As a result, for low-volume and / orhigh-cost products where repairs may be required, then buffers are a good solution.
Overall, if reliability is an issue, use a buffer. Otherwise, in very low-cost (or high-
volume) products, or in situations where repair is not a practical proposition, thenuse of a buffer will simply add to production costs. 
Portability
These techniques work with all 8051s (and most other microcontroller and micro-processor families). HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 122
Use CMOS buffers
As these discussions suggest, it makes sense to use CMOS logic in your buffer
designs wherever possible. You should also make it clear in the design documenta-tion that CMOS logic is to be used. 
If working with boards designed by other people, the use of pull-up resistors at
the buffer outputs can suggest that TTL logic was assumed; however, CMOS logiccan still be used. If there is no pull-up resistor, then CMOS should be used.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 148 ---
As usual, if working with port pins that do not have internal pull-up resistors, you
need to include such resistors (10K will do) in your design: see NAKED LED [page 110]
for further details.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
IC buffers allow multiple (small) loads to be controlled from a single port.
Buffers can improve reliability.Use of buffers increases the product cost.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The other patterns in this chapter (particularly IC DRIVER [page 134]) provide
alternative solutions.
Example: Buffering three LEDs with a 74HC04
Figure 7.14 shows a 74HC04 buffering three LEDs. As discussed in ‘Solution’, we donot require pull-up resistors with the HC (CMOS) buffers.
In this case, we assume that these LEDs are to be driven at 15 mA each, which is
within the capabilities (50 mA total) of the buffer. 
The required resistor values are:
V
cc– Vdiode5V– 2V
Rled=                      =                 = 200 Ω
Idiode0.015 A
Please refer to PORT I /O[page 174] for suitable software.
Further reading
—IC BUFFER 123
FIGURE  7.14 Driving three LEDs via a 74HC04 inverter200Ω5V
8051 devicePort X
74HC04(Red)200Ω5V
(Amber)200Ω5V
(Green)(PX.a,
PX.b,PX.c)
Logic 1
to lightLED(PX.a) (PX.b) (PX.c)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 149 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 124
BJT DRIVER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you drive DC loads requiring currents of up to around 2A, from the port ofan 8051 microcontroller?
Background
A bipolar-junction transistor (BJT) is a three-terminal semiconductor device, devel-oped in the early 1950s. The full name (or acronym) will be used here to distinguishthis pattern from the FET (field-effect transistor) considered later in this chapter. 
As far as we are concerned, a BJT is most useful as a current-controlled switch. We
will not be concerned here with details of their underlying operation but will,instead, focus on the ways in which these transistors may be used to allow a micro-controller to drive a medium-power DC load.
Solution
BJT transistors come in two basic forms: PNP and NPN (Figure 7.15).
FIGURE  7.15 The two forms of BJT. [Left] PNP. [Right] NPN
[Note: For our purposes, the main value of the BJT is that it acts as a voltage controlled switch. In the  case the PNP device, curr ent flow-
ing from the base is used to control a much larger current through the load. In the case of the NPN device, current flowing int o the base
of the device performs the same function.]B
|baseE
CBJT (PNP)B
|baseC
EBJT (NPN)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 150 ---
BJT DRIVER 125
To ‘turn on’ the transistor, we need to supply (in the case of NPN) or sink (in the
case of PNP) a base current given by the formula:
IcollectorIbase≥
hfe
where hfeis the transistor ‘gain’. This varies from values of around 15 to around 800:
values of 100 are typical for the types of devices we are considering. As previouslynoted, the pins of an 8051 device can sink or source around 20 mA of current (atmost): thus, using a suitable BJT, we can control currents of up to around 2A (20 mAmultipled by h
fe). 
We will give two specific examples here: a PNP transistor switch and an NPN
transistor switch.
A PNP transistor switch
To illustrate the type of BJT application we will be concerned with in this pattern,consider Figure 7.16. This shows a small lamp (5V , 500 mA), connected to a PNP tran-sistor. Note that, in this circuit, almost any PNP transistor will work, provided it hasan h
fevalue of around 100 (given on the data sheet), and can handle a collector cur-
rent of around 500 mA. Note that in this case, a Zetex ZTX 751 transistor is used. Thiscan control a (collector) current of up to 2A, which is a suitable level for a wide rangeof applications. Such devices are not expensive: expect to pay around $0.30 per tran-sistor (multiples of 1,000 devices).
Briefly, the circuit operates as follows. When the microcontroller pin is at Logic 0,
current will flow out of the base of the transistor, driving the device into saturation:the required load current will then flow and the lamp will light. When the microcon-troller pin is at Logic 1, however, no current will flow from the base of the transistorand the load current will be (essentially) 0.
Overall, the significant thing about this circuit is that a very small control current flow-
ing out of the base of the transistor (Ibasein the figure) controls the flow of a much larger
current (Iload) flowing through the lamp. This is the basis of all BJT interface circuits.
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-ware design. (See 
NAKED LED [page 110].)
Buffering the output
We use BJTs to allow us to control comparatively high-power loads. The loads canchange: for example, devices can short-circuit, motors can stall or the whole devicemay suffer physical damage. In such circumstances, the microcontroller port can besubject to high voltages and / or currents. This may result in the whole microcon-troller being rendered inoperative.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 151 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 126
In many circumstances, it is safer to use a buffer to protect the microcontroller in
the event of a problem with the load or BJT driver. Figure 7.17 shows a suitable circuit.
Note that we have used two inverter gates to obtain the required logic. As multiple
gates are available on a single 74x04, and this is a low-cost buffer, this can be a goodsolution. Alternatively, the 74x241-based circuit in Figure 7.18 may be used.
Note that, for reasons discussed in 
IC BUFFER [page 118], a pull-up resistor may
be required at the base of the transistor in both of these buffer circuits, if you useTTL technology. FIGURE  7.16 A PNP transistor driving a lamp. The lamp is controlled by an 8051 microcontroller
[Note: See NAKED LED [page 110] for details of pull-up resistors, one of which may be required here. Note the lamp supply voltage is,
here, assumed to be 5V: however, the load supply voltage need not be the same as the controller supply voltage.]B
|baseE
C|load5.5V, 0.5A lamp
To microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vload
ZTX751= = =
c b e
ZTX751
(TO–92,
viewed from bottom)
FIGURE  7.17 Adding a 74 ×04 buffer between the microcontroller and a BJT driverBE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to drive load )Vload
ZTX751 (pnp)RloadLoad
74×04www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 152 ---
An NPN transistor switch
We can develop a circuit similar to that shown in Figure 7.17, using an NPN transistor
(Figure 7.19).
In Figure 7.19 we have used an inverter to both invert the port output (so that a
Logic 0 output is now required to drive the load) and to provide a degree of isolationbetween the transistor and the microcontroller. 
Note that in Figure 7.19, we need to ‘source’ current: that is, the direction of conven-
tional current flow is into the base of the transistor. As we discussed in
NAKED LOAD
[page 115], the need to source current may be problematic in some circumstances. Forthis reason, drivers based on PNP transistors can be slightly more portable.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.BJT DRIVER 127
FIGURE  7.18 Adding a 74 ×241 buffer between the microcontroller and a BJT driverBE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to drive load )Vload
ZTX751 (pnp)RloadLoad
74×241
FIGURE  7.19 One way of driving an NPN transistor from an 8051 port pin
[Note: that use of a CMOS buffer is assumed: see IC BUFFER [page 118].]BC
ETo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to drive load )Vload
ZTX651 (npn)RloadLoad
74×04= = =
c b e
ZTX651
(TO–92,
viewed from bottom)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 153 ---
Reliability and safety implications
Switching on lamps and DC motors
We have presented various equations in this chapter that allow the value of series resis-
tors to be calculated for use in drive circuits like that shown in Figure 7.19. In presentingsuch equations we have implicitly assumed that the load resistance itself is fixed. 
In fact, not all devices present a fixed resistive load. For example, when controlling
lamps or DC motors, the initial current required may be very high. This surge of cur-rent may last several hundreds of milliseconds, before it settles to the steady-statevalue. Your drive circuit needs to be capable of surviving the initial current surge.
One way of dealing with inrush currents is to ‘over rate’ your drive circuit. This
means that if, for example, your load is a lamp or motor with a steady-state currentrequirement of (say) 1A, you should rate your drive circuit at (say) 10A or more, sothat you can deal with the inrush current. Please note that it is seldom possible toguess the likely inrush currents. Check the data sheets – they will provide this infor-mation. In the absence of accurate data, assume a factor of at least 10.
Another way of solving this problem is to use what is known as a thermistor in
series with the load (Figure 7.20). These have a resistance of around 1–2 Ωwhen cold:
when they warm up (which they do when carrying current) the resistance dropsaround 0 Ω. Even a small amount of initial resistance will greatly reduce the impact of
the inrush current.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 128
Please also note that it is easy to overlook or ignore this issue . Not all drive cir-
cuits will fail immediately if subjected to excessive loads and your test circuit mayoperate reliably on the bench. However, stressing any drive circuit beyond its maxi-mum ratings will dramatically shorten its useful life and it will fail in the field. If inany doubt: over rate by at least a factor of 10 andadd a thermistor.Pin reset values
After the system is reset, the contents of the various port special function registers (SFRs)
are set to 0xFF. This fact has very important safety and reliability implications.
Consider, for example, that you have connected a motorized device to a port
and that the device is activated by a ‘Logic 1’ output: that is, a ‘1’ output on a portpin. When the microcontroller is reset, the motorized device may be activated andbegin moving. Even if you set the port outputs to 0 at the start of your program,the motor may be ‘pulsed’ briefly, before you are able to stop it. This can, in somesystems, lead to the injury or even death of users of the system or those in theimmediate vicinity of the system.
Because the output pins are ‘reset high’ it is important to ensure that any devices
which have safety implications are connected to the microcontroller in such a waythat they are ‘active low’: that is, that an output of ‘0’ on the relevant port pin willactivate the device. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 154 ---
Switching off inductive DC loads
Just because you have managed to switch on a load safely does not, unfortunately,
mean that you problems are solved, if your load is inductive.
An inductive load is anything containing a coil of wire: common examples are
electromechanical relays and motors. Switching off such loads must be carried outwith great caution because, when the current is removed, the voltage across theinductor will increase rapidly. The rapid increase in voltage occurs because the opera-tion of the inductor is defined by the equation:
dI
V = L
dt
Here, Vis the voltage across the inductor, Lis the inductance, and dI/dt is the rate
of change of current flow. If we suddenly remove the current (that is, ‘switch off’ theinductor), the resulting rapid change in current will be translated into a rapid voltageincrease. This ‘inductive kick’ can be enough to destroy logic gates or any other formof drive circuitry linked to the load. To protect these circuits, a diode can be used toblock the ‘kick’ (Figure 7.21).
Please note that the diode used must be able to handle not only the steady-state
current but also the turn-off current. The ubiquitous and cheap 1N4004 diode canhandle 1A, and is appropriate for many circuits. Where this is not sufficient, a widerange of other capacities are available: for example, the 1N5401 (3A, 100V), the40HF10 (40A, 100V) or the 70UR60 (250A, 600V). Note that the prices increase dra-matically with current capacity: the low-power diodes cost a few cents, while thehigh-power alternatives may cost $10.00.BJT DRIVER 129
FIGURE  7.20 Using a thermistor to prevent damage due to inrush currentsBE
C5.5V, 0.5A lamp
To microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vcc
ZTX751Thermistor, R1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 155 ---
Note that, for faster current decay after switch off, a resistor can be used in place of
the diode (Figure 7.22). At turn off, the voltage across the resistor will be given by:
Vresistor= Iturnoff×R
The voltage drop across the transistor (or your other drive circuit), at turn off, will
be:
Vtransistor= Vcc+ Vresistor
You must choose a resistor value such that that Vtransistoris within allowed limits.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 130
FIGURE  7.21 Protecting transistors against inductive kick with a diodeBE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vcc
ZTX751
FIGURE  7.22 Protecting transistors against inductive kick with a resistorBE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vcc
ZTX751Rwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 156 ---
Protecting again load faults
The use of thermistors, diodes and inrush resistors is designed to protect the switch-
ing circuit under normal conditions. When working with high-power loads, you alsoneed to deal with the problems caused by damage to the load. In particular, we needto consider the possibility that the load will be short-circuited.
A particular problem arises with semiconductor switching devices such as BJTs. The
thermal mass of such semiconductor devices is very low: this means that an excessivecurrent flow – caused, for example, by a short or a stalled motor – will very rapidly takethe device out of the safe operating region (see Lander, 1993; or Rashid, 1993, fordetails). To protect against this, it is essential that you use a fuse in series with the load. 
Note that an ‘ordinary’ fuse will not be adequate: the fuse must blow very rapidly
to avoid damage to the semiconductor device: such devices are usually labelled ‘highspeed’ and will be described as being suitable for semiconductor protection.
Portability
These techniques work with all 8051s (and most other microcontroller and micro-processor families). 
As usual, if working with port pins that do not have internal pull-up resistors, you
need to include such resistors (10K will do) in your design.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Software developers sometimes seem to hold the view that discrete transis-tors are ‘old fashioned’ and have now been replaced by IC equivalents. Thisis not the case. In many applications, particularly where a small number ofrelatively low- and medium-power drivers are required, discrete transistorsare widely used, not least because they are available for under $0.10 each(around half the price of ICs), even in small quantities: as such they can rep-resent a very cost-effective solution.
BJTs can operate at very low voltages, compatible with low-voltage micro-
controllers.
The maximum BJT gain of around 100 means that, in most circumstances, we are
restricted to current flows of around 1A–2A, if we use a single transistor. SingleMOSFETs, by comparison, can readily switch loads of 100A.BJT DRIVER 131
Please note (again) that it is easy to overlook or ignore this issue. Not all drive
circuits will fail immediately if subjected to excessive loads and your test circuit mayoperate reliably on the bench. However, stressing any drive circuit beyond its maxi-mum ratings will dramatically shorten its useful life and it will fail in the field. If inany doubt, use a suitable diode or resistor.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 157 ---
The switching speed of transistors (and in particular the switch-off speed) can be
around 0.5 µs. This may sound fast, but, particularly in some pulse-width modu-lation applications (see
HARDWARE PWM [page 742]), may not be fast enough. 
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The main alternatives to the BJT DRIVER are IC DRIVER [page 134] and MOSFET DRIVER
[page 139].
Example: Driving a high-power IR LED transmitter
Infra-red (IR) LEDs are widely used in domestic applications for remote control. They
are also a component in many security systems. IR LEDs often have higher currentrequirements than conventional LEDs, but are otherwise connected in the same way. 
For example, the Siemens SFH485 IR LED requires a current of 100 mA, at a for-
ward voltage of 1.5V. If we wish to drive this LED using (say) Port 1 of an 8051microcontroller, then a variation on the circuit from Figure 7.16 can be used.
Here, we will use a low-cost (PNP) transistor: a 2N2905. This can handle a maxi-
mum load current of 600 mA. With I
LEDat 100 mA, a supply voltage of 5V and an
LED forward voltage of 1.5V , the required value of R2 is:
5.0V– 1.5 V– 0.4 V
R2 =                                  = 31 Ω
0.100 A
The saturation voltage (VCE) for the transistor of 0.4V is taken from the transistor
data sheet.
Here we would use the next standard resistor value, in this case 33 Ω. Note that the
nearest value is 30 Ω: however, by using this we run the slight risk of running the LED
at too high a forward voltage, and reducing the life of this component.
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 7.23.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 132
FIGURE  7.23 Driving an IR LED via a transistor (PNP) driver
[Note: A Logic 0 output is required to generate an IR output.]BE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to drive LED )Vload
2N2905 (pnp)33ΩSFH 485
IR LEDwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 158 ---
Example: Driving a large buzzer
Suppose we wish to drive a loud buzzer, as part of an alarm system. The Klaxon KTB
buzzer, for example, requires 30 mA and 12V to operate. Figure 7.24 shows a suitabledrive circuit.
Here, again, the 2N2905 provides a low-cost solution. 
Further reading
—BJT DRIVER 133
FIGURE  7.24 Controlling a klaxon with a 2N2905 BJTBE
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to sound klaxon)+12V
2N2905 (pnp)Klaxon unit–+www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 159 ---
IC DRIVER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you safely control multiple, medium-power DC loads from a single micro-controller port?
Background
See IC BUFFER [page 118] for general background material.
Solution
We consider examples of both ‘sink’ and ‘source’ driver ICs in this section.
General-purpose current sinks
Most general-purpose IC ‘sink’ drivers are suitable for switching DC voltages of up toaround 50 V (higher voltage variants are available). They are typically capable of sink-ing currents of around 0.5A to 2A.
One popular driver IC is the ULN2803 series (from various manufacturers). For
example, the ULN2803A device contains eight drivers, each capable of switching upto 50v (DC) at 0.5A. Note that each of the drivers is made up of a pair of Darlington-connected (NPN) BJTs: a Darlington arrangement involves a cascading of twotransistors to increase the current gain (see Figure 7.25).
Note that this device includes diodes to protect against ‘inductive kick’ on the chip
(see ‘Reliability and safety issues’), which can help reduce component counts.
Note also that: 
GThe ULN2803A requires no explicit power supply connection.
GPin 9 should be connected to ground.
GIf switching inductive loads, the common cathode of the eight built-in diodes(Pin 10) should be connected to the positive rail of the (high-power) supply (upto +50V).
GThe switching speed of this device is around 1 µs.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 134www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 160 ---
General-purpose current sources
The ULN2803 family are current ‘sinks’: sometimes, however, we require current
sources. Here the UDN2585A is an example of a useful source driver. It can source acurrent of up to 120 mA on each of the eight output lines, at the same time, at volt-ages up to 25V (see Figure 7.26).IC DRIVER 135
FIGURE  7.25 The pinout and internal details of the Allegro ULN2803A (current sink buffer) (reproduced
courtesy of Allegro Microsystems, Inc.)1
2
3
4
5
6
7
818
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10 9
FIGURE  7.26 The UDN2585A (current source driver) (reproduced courtesy of Allegro 
Microsystems, Inc.)1
2
3
4
5
6
7
818
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10 9 SUB/VEEVSwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 161 ---
The UDN2585A will be used in various examples in this book as a driver for multi-
plexed LED displays: see Chapter 21 for further details.
Note also that: 
GPin 9 on the UDN2585A should be connected to the positive rail of the (high-power) supply (up to +25V).
GIf switching inductive loads, then the common anode of the eight built-in diodes(Pin 10) should be connected to ground (it does no harm to do this anyway).
GThe switching speed of this device is around 5 µs.
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-
ware design, at the buffer inputs. See NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.
For example, there are no pull-up resistors on pins P1.0, P1.1 on the small Atmel
devices, such as the 89C2051. To use these devices, you need to add external pull-upresistors. 10K is a suitable value. Figure 7.27 shows the use of the ULN2803A with anAT89C2051 device.
Note that you will not generally require pull-ups at the buffer outputs.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety implications
There are a number of crucial reliability and safety issues associated with the use of
high-power DC loads: these are discussed in the pattern BJT DRIVER [page 124]. Please
refer to this pattern for further information.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 136
FIGURE  7.27 The need for pull-up resistors on the Atmel AT89C2051987654321
ULN2803A
101112131415161718
111213141516171989C205110K 10K
20
18www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 162 ---
Note that when switching high-power loads in safety-critical applications you may wish
to use an IC BUFFER [page 118] between microcontroller port and the IC driver chip.
Portability
These techniques work with all 8051s (and most other microcontroller and micro-processor families). 
As usual, if working with port pins that do not have internal pull-up resistors, you
need to include such resistors (10K will do) in your design.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Can be a cheap and easy to use solution if you require more than twomedium-power DC outputs.
Unlike transistor drivers, ICs tend to have restricted operating voltages: in many
cases, the operating range of such devices is rather less than that of the small8051s used in many battery-powered applications. This can mean that, if using ICdrivers in a battery-powered device, you will be forced to use a more sophisticated(regulated) battery supply: this can add significantly to the application cost. Ifyour application is battery powered, you may find that it is only cost-effective touse an IC driver if four or more output pins require drivers.
Most of the cheap driver ICs require 5V supplies and cannot therefore be easily
used in 3V designs.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The other patterns in this chapter provide alternative solutions.
Example: Displaying error codes
A basic requirement in many embedded applications is an ability to inform the userof errors that may have occurred in the application. These may include, for example,errors in sensors, errors in actuators or errors in slave nodes.
A simple, low-cost way of reporting such errors is to make use of an ‘error port’: if
the system is operating normally, this port will be used to display a ‘normal’ code:otherwise, an error code will be displayed.
The hardware required to display such codes consists of eight LEDs, each con-
nected to a port pin. To ensure the code is visible under all lighting conditions,high-intensity LEDs may be required. Typical high-intensity LEDs have a currentrequirement of 25 mA: the total requirement for eight LEDs (200 mA) is therefore farin excess of the current that can be supported by the ‘naked’ microcontroller and isaround three times the level that can be supported by an IC buffer.
Figure 7.28 shows a possible hardware solution for displaying the codes, using a
ULN2803A as an 
IC DRIVER .IC DRIVER 137www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 163 ---
Note that suitable software for the display of error codes is discussed in Chapter 14.
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 138
FIGURE  7.28 Hardware for displaying error codes in an embedded applicationRledRledRledRledRledRledRledRled
8051 DevicePort 2LED 7VccULN2803AP2.0 – Pin 8
P2.1 – Pin 7P2.2 – Pin 6P2.3 – Pin 5P2.4 – Pin 4P2.5 – Pin 3P2.6 – Pin 2P2.7 – Pin 1
Pin 11 – LED 0
Pin 12 – LED 1Pin 13 – LED 2Pin 14 – LED 3Pin 15 – LED 4Pin 16 – LED 5Pin 17 – LED 6Pin 18 – LED 7
LED 6 LED 5 LED 4 LED 3 LED 2 LED 1 LED 0For 25 mA LEDs, Rled = 120 Ohms
9www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 164 ---
MOSFET DRIVER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you control a DC load with high current requirements (up to around 100A)using a microcontroller?
Background
In BJT DRIVER [page 124] we saw that a bipolar junction transistor is a current-
controlled switch. By contrast, a metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor(MOSFET) is a voltage-controlled switch (Figure 7.29). With a gate voltage of 0, the
device will block current flow between the drain and source, even when a potential ofseveral hundred volts is applied.
MOSFET ‘switch-on’ times are similar to those of the BJT, but – unlike BJTs – the
‘switch-off’ time is also very fast (of the order of 50 ns). As a result the MOSFET is par-ticularly popular in applications requiring high switching frequencies (up to around 1MHz), such as PWM-based speed control and pulse-rate modulation systems (see, forexample, 
HARDWARE PWM [page 808] and HARDWARE PRM [page 742]).
One other important characteristic of MOSFETs is that the oxidised metal gate elec-
trode electrically insulates the gate from the channel, which means there is essentiallyzero current flow between the gate and the channel during any part of the signalcycle. This gives MOSFETs an extremely large input impedance. It also means that thedevices are sensitive to static: see ‘Reliability and Safety Issues’.MOSFET DRIVER 139
FIGURE  7.29 The two varieties of MOSFET. [Left] An N-channel device. [Right] A P-channel deviceGD
SGS
Dwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 165 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 140
The (oxidized metal) gate electrode electrically insulates the gate from the channel,
which means there is essentially zero current between the gate and the channelduring any part of the signal cycle. This gives the MOSFET an extremely large inputimpedance. It also means that the devices are sensitive to static: see ‘Reliability andsafety issues’.
Solution
None of the interface circuits so far considered allow us to switch high DC currents.MOSFETs provide a flexible and cost-effective solution to many high-power applica-tions, able to switch currents of up to 100A or more. Such devices are frequentlymounted in a package that allows effective use of heat sinks, to dissipate the heatgenerated during normal operation of the device (Figure 7.30).
Increasing numbers of MOSFETS can be driven directly from a processor port.
However, in most cases it is necessary to drive the device with a higher voltage(12V +) than is available from the port itself. In addition, as we have discussed in con-nection with 
BJT DRIVER [page 124], it is generally good policy to have an extra layer
of protection between the ports and any high-power load. 
In these circumstances, a good solution is to use a ‘level-shifter’ IC, such as the
cheap 74 ×06, as an interface between the port and the MOSFET (see Figure 7.31). FIGURE  7.30 A typical package (TO-220) for a power MOSFET, providing provision for the use of a 
heat sink
FIGURE  7.31 Pinout of the 74 ×06 level shifter
[Note: The chip contains six inverting buffers: these link A0 (the input to buffer 0) to /YO (the output from buffer 0), A1 to /Y1, and so on. Vcc
should be connected to the 5V supply; the voltage at the buffer output can be up to 12V or, in the case of the 74F06A up to 30V , at up to
approximately 10 0 mA.]A0
/Y0
A1
/Y1
A2
/Y2
GND 7654321
891011121314Vcc
A5/Y5A4
/Y4
A3/Y374×06www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 166 ---
For example, see Figure 7.32. This illustrates the use of a useful MOSFET, the IRF540,
linked to a port via 74 ×06. Note that that the inverting nature of the 74 ×06 allows us
to ensure that we require ‘Logic 0’ to drive the load: again, this is good policy.
Note also that the IRF540 can switch loads of up to 3A at 100V (DC). Note that (in
the N-channel version) it has a very low ‘on’ resistance (0.04 Ohms). This is impor-tant as the power loss in the MOSFET is determined by the relationship:
P = I
2R
At 30A, even a low resistance translates into a substantial power loss. Remember
that this power will be dissipated as heat and the larger the loss the greater the cool-ing requirements will be.
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-ware design. See 
NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety implicationsMOSFET DRIVER 141
FIGURE  7.32 Using a MOSFET driver
[Note: that a Logic 0 output is required to ‘switch on’ the load. Note that, as we are using the 74 ×06 for level shifting, the pull-up resistor is
required; note that it is connected to the high-power supply rail.]GD
STo microcomputer output pin
(Logic 0 to drive load )+12VLoad
RloadVload
5K
GDSIRF540n
74×06IRF540N
There are a number of crucial reliability and safety issues associated with the use of
high-power DC loads: these are discussed in the pattern BJT DRIVER [page 124].
Please refer to this pattern for further information.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 167 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 142
Handling MOSFETs
Because the oxide layer on the gate electrode is extremely thin, the MOSFET is suscep-
tible to destruction by electrostatic discharges. Take suitable precautions whenhandling them.
Portability
These techniques work with all 8051s (and most other microcontroller and micro-processor families). 
As usual, if working with port pins that do not have internal pull-up resistors, you
need to include such resistors (10K will do) in your design.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
MOSFETs have a large voltage and current capacity.
MOSFETs have fast switching speeds. MOSFETs are static sensitive.At low currents, BJTs can be more cost-effective. Solid-state relays, with inbuilt opto-isolation between low- and high-voltage sides
of the system, can be more reliable: see 
SSR DRIVER (DC)[page 144].
Related patterns and alternative solutions
We can use power BJTs to do a similar job to the MOSFETs used here (see BJT DRIVER
[page 124] for background details). However, BJTs tend to be more valuable at lower
power levels. 
A particular disadvantage of BJTs is that, when in saturation, the voltage drop
across the emitter / collector terminals is about 1V. In some applications (for example,H-bridges used for DC motor control) two transistors are required in each ‘arm’ of thebridge, with the result that the voltage drop becomes around 2V: in typical 12V sup-plies, this represents a major loss. Using MOSFETs, this loss can be reduced by a factorof around 10. This combined with the general low cost and high switching speeds ofthe MOSFET solution help to explain why this approach is so popular.
Another alternative, when working with high-current and / or high-voltage loads,
is the insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT). The IGBT combines some of the bestfeatures of BJT and MOSFET approaches. It has a low on-state resistance and a turn-offand turn-on time of around 1 µs. 
Example: Lighting a lamp
Figure 7.33 shows the control of a 12V , 20W lamp using a MOSFET driver.
Note that even this comparatively low-voltage lamp has a large inrush current: the
thermistor, Rt, is included in series with the lamp to reduce this current flow: see BJT
DRIVER [page 124] for further details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 168 ---
Example: Open-loop DC motor control
Figure 7.34 shows the control of a 12V , 2A DC motor using a MOSFET driver.
Note the use of the diode to protect against inductive kick when the motor is
switched off: see BJT DRIVER [page 124] for further details.
Further reading
—MOSFET DRIVER 143
FIGURE  7.33 Controlling a 12V, 20W lamp using a MOSFET driverGD
STo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to drive lamp )5K12V, 20W lamp
Thermistor, Rt
(EPCOS B57237S229M)+12V
74×06IRF540N
FIGURE  7.34 Control of a DC motor using a MOSFET driver1K
–10K+12V
74LS06IRF540N (or similar)M
0V8051 devicePX.YLogic 0 (0v) to turn motorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 169 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 144
SSR DRIVER (DC)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you ‘switch on’ or ‘switch off’ a piece of high-voltage (DC) electrical equip-ment using a microcontroller? 
Background
A solid-state relay is a semiconductor device that was designed to take the place of aconventional electromagnetic (EM) relay. We do not recommend the use of EM relaysfor switching DC loads and therefore do not consider EM relays until we discuss theswitching of AC loads in Chapter 8. If you are unfamiliar with EM relays, you mayfind it useful to refer to Chapter 8 (and specifically to 
EMR DRIVER [page 149]) for
background information on EM relays before considering this pattern.
Solution
Unlike EM relays, solid-state relays (SSRs) are purely electronic in nature: they haveno moving (mechanical) switch contacts. Both DC and AC solid-state relays are avail-able: note that, unlike EM relays, a DC relay will notswitch AC supplies and a DC
relay will notswitch AC supplies: we explain why this is the case later in the pattern.
SSRs provide very high levels of isolation between the ‘control’ and ‘switching’ cir-
cuits by optical techniques. The ‘control’ inputs will be connected to one (or more)LEDs. These will then, without any electrical link, control a phototransistor or photo-diode array, which will, in turn, connect to further switching circuitry. In the case of aDC SSR, the switching circuit will typically be based on a MOSFET, and the current-and voltage-switching capabilities will generally be similar to MOSFETs.
Use of SSRs is generally straightforward: the inputs are directly compatible with
microcontroller port voltages, and – because of the built-in opto-isolation – there isgenerally no need to add additional gates between the microcontroller and the SSR. 
The examples below will illustrate the use of these devices.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 170 ---
SSR DRIVER (DC) 145
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-
ware design, at the input to the SSR. See NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.
Hardware resource implications
Every implementation of this pattern uses at least one port pin.
Reliability and safety issues
How robust are SSRs?
SSRs are less electrically robust than EM relays: in the presence of excessive voltages(due to back EMF from inductive loads, for example) or where the SSR is subjected tolarger currents (possibly due to ‘inrush’), the device will fail. If in doubt, over rate thedevice: that is, use a 300 V device where a 200 V device would probably do.
One other issue: we have seen people try to use more than one SSR in parallel in
order to increase the current rating. This will only rarely work and is never reliable.
The problem is that you have no way of ensuring that both relays switch on atexactly the same time . When one relay has turned on, the supply voltage drop will
usually mean that the second (and subsequent) SSRs do not turn on – until the firstrelay fails. Thus, the likely result is that, within around a millisecond, all the relayswill blow, in rapid succession.
What’s in a name?
Despite the name, there are important differences between ‘solid-state’ and ‘electro-mechanical’ relays, particularly when it comes to circuit testing. If you are using an EMrelay, you can check to make sure that the contacts are closing by using a multimeterto measure the resistance of the switch contacts: this resistance will be essentially zerowhen the contacts are closed and essentially infinite when they are open. This behav-iour will be observed without connecting up the high-voltage side of the application. 
You cannot test an SSR-based circuit in the same manner: most SSRs will always show
an infinite resistance when measured with a multimeter. To test an SSR, you need tooperate close to the specified operating voltage. Initial tests are therefore best performed(carefully) using a high-voltage load (we usually use an ordinary household lightbulb).
What happens when it goes wrong?
The typical failure mode of an SSR is an output short circuit: this can be dangerous.There are a number of general reliability and safety issues associated with the use of
high-power DC loads: these are discussed in the pattern BJT DRIVER [page 124].
Please refer to this pattern for further information.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 171 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 146
Portability
SSRs can be used with any processor type. However, there are other portability issues
to consider.
The most important (already briefly mentioned) is that an AC SSR cannot be used
to switch DC. The reason for this is that the AC SSR contains zero-crossing detectioncircuits (see Chapter 8 for details). Because the DC supply never crosses zero, the SSRwill never switch on.
Similarly, most DC SSRs are based on MOSFETs. Using a MOSFET to switch AC
is ineffective: at best, the device will act as a form of rectifier for a short period, untilit overheats.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SSRs do not wear out (in normal use).
SSRs are resistant to shock and vibration.SSRs have a high switching speed.
SSRs have high levels of isolation between the ‘control’ and ‘switching’ circuits. SSRs generate only very low levels of electrical noise and generate no
acoustic noise.
SSRs do not exhibit switch bounce.
SSRs can be instantly and irrevocably damaged by excessive voltage and /
or current. 
The typical failure mode of an SSR is an output short circuit: this can be
dangerous.
The ‘switched’ side has a minimum operating voltage and current: these may be
quite high, complicating initial testing.
EM relays can usually switch higher voltages and currents. Unlike an EM relay, the ‘switched’ side exhibits some leakage current in the
off-state. 
The ‘on’ resistance is typically much larger than that of an EM relays: this trans-
lates directly into wasted heat and, hence, the need for heatsinks. 
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See the other patterns in this chapter and Chapter 8, for alternative approaches.
Example: SSRs in telecommunication applications
Small DC semiconductor relays are commonly used in telecommunications equip-ment, such as modems, in place of larger EM relays. Indeed, the telecoms market is soimportant that special-purpose SSRs, intended to be used for telephone current linesensing, are also available (see, for example, products from Erg components).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 172 ---
In modems and similar devices, these SSRs provide 200-300V (DC) output ratings
at around 200 mA. They provide a low on resistance (typically 10 Ω) and an ‘off’ resist-
ance of some 500 M Ω, at voltages up to 4 kV. 
Example: Open-loop DC motor control
In MOSFET DRIVER [page 139] we presented an example of a MOSFET used for open-
loop DC motor control (see Figure 7.34 for details). 
If we use an appropriate SSR we can simplify this circuit considerably. For example,
our motor required 2A (continuous) at up to 12V for correct operation. Here we canuse an IOR PVNO12 SSR. Unlike the majority of SSRs, this can switch AC or DC loads,of up to 20 V , 4.5A. It has no zero-crossing detection. The control current is a maxi-mum of 10mA, which is compatible with our microcontroller. Figure 7.35 shows therequired circuit.
Note that an important advantage of the SSR solution is that it provides a greater
degree of isolation between the controller and the motor itself. Note also that, to con-trol the speed of this motor, pulse-width modulation may be possible: see 
HARDWARE
PWM [page 808] and SOFTWARE PWM [page 831].
Further reading
—SSR DRIVER (DC) 147
FIGURE  7.35 Open-loop DC motor control using a solid-state relay+12V
M
8051 devicePX.YLogic 0
to turnmotor
PVN012
SSRVdc
(12 V ground: control’ and
‘switch’ circuits are isolated)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 173 ---
Driving AC loads
Introduction
Consider some problems:
GA pump in a domestic or industrial heating system must be switched on and off at
preset times.
GA series of high-intensity lights around the perimeter of a factory complex are to beactivated in the event of a security incident.
GAn electrical heater in a brewery must be used to maintain a precise temperature.
GThe motor in a washing machine must go through a pre-programmed series ofmovements.
In these – and many other applications – we need safely and reliably to control
comparatively high-level AC supplies. In this chapter we will consider two popularapproaches to this problem
GEMR DRIVER [page 149]
GSSR DRIVER (AC)[page 156]chapter  8www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 174 ---
EMR DRIVER 149
EMR DRIVER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you ‘switch on’ or ‘switch off’ a piece of high-power (AC) electrical equip-ment using a microcontroller?
Background
—
Solution
We consider in this pattern how, where appropriate, we can use an electromechanical(EM) relay to control an AC supply.
An EM relay is, in essence, a mechanical switch controlled by the current flowing
through a solenoid. These devices have been used for many years to switch on and offthe AC loads, often at very high power levels. In most cases, large electromechanicalrelays cannot be driven directly from the microcontrontroller port and will requirethe use of some form of transistor or IC drive circuit (for example, see Figure 8.1).
More recently, some electromechanical relays have become available that operate
at logic levels (a few mA, 5V). Typical examples of such devices are small ‘reed relays’of the type illustrated in Figure 8.2.
Reed relays of this type are available that will switch mains voltages (up to 250V
AC) at powers of up to around 10W. Note that many devices have internal diodesacross the relay coil and that various combinations of switch (normally open, nor-mally closed, multiple switches) are available.
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-ware design. See 
NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 175 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 150
Reliability and safety issuesFIGURE  8.1 Using an electromechanical (EM) relay to control an AC bulbLogic 0 to
light the lamp 8051
devicePX.YVdc
PNPVac
250V 100W lamp
FIGURE  8.2 A typical small (EM) reed relay
Working with mains voltages
Always keep in mind that people and circuits that deal with mains electricity do not
mix. You must design mains switching circuits in such a way that the dangerousvoltages are not accessible to the user. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 176 ---
EMR DRIVER 151
Zero-crossing detection
Take a radio and hold it next to a (mechanical) light switch in your house or office.
Turn the lights on and off while listening to the radio. The ‘crackles’ you hear are asymptom of electromagnetic interference (EMI), generated by an ‘arc’ that formsbetween the mechanical switch contacts as the switch is opened or closed. This formof EMI can be annoying for radio listeners: for embedded systems, it can be fatal. Youtherefore need to take care when switching high-power loads. This is a particularproblem with AC loads, because such loads tend to be at high voltages. 
Solutions are available. To understand how these work, consider a simple source of
alternating current illustrated in Figure 8.3. We can greatly reduce the interferencecaused by switching at an appropriate point in the cycle: in Figure 8.3 switching atPoint A will cause maximal interference, while switching at Point B will cause almostno interference. Therefore, to minimize interference, we need to detect the time atwhich the waveform ‘crosses zero’ and switch at this point. Pin reset values
After the system is reset, the contents of the various port special function registers (SFRs)
are set to 0xFF. This fact has very important safety and reliability implications.
This issue is discussed in BJT DRIVER [page 124]: please refer to this pattern for
details. Briefly, because the output pins are ‘reset high’ it is important to ensure thatany devices which have safety implications are connected to the microcontroller insuch a way that they are ‘active low’: that is, that an output of ‘0’ on the relevantport pin will activate the device. 
FIGURE  8.3 An AC supply showing sub-optimal (A) and optimal (B) switching pointsB AVoltage TimeA key disadvantage of EM relays is that they do not incorporate zero-crossing 
detection circuitry.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 177 ---
Switching on lamps and other inductive loads
As we discussed in Chapter 7, not all loads present a fixed resistive load. For example,
when controlling lamps or AC motors, the initial current required may be very high. Thissurge of current may last several hundreds of milliseconds, before it settles to the steady-state value. Your drive circuit needs to be capable surviving the initial current surge.
One way of dealing with inrush currents is to ‘over rate’ your drive circuit. This
means that if, for example, your load is a lamp or motor with a steady-state currentrequirement of (say) 1A, you should rate your drive circuit at (say) 10A or more, sothat you can deal with the inrush current. Note that it is seldom possible to guess thelikely inrush currents. Check the data sheets – they will provide this information. Inthe absence of accurate data, assume a factor of at least 10.
Remember also that, as we saw in 
BJT DRIVER [page 124], another way of solving
this problem is to use a thermistor in series with the load. 
Switching off inductive AC loads
As we discussed in connection with DC loads (Chapter 7), an inductive load is any-thing containing a coil of wire: common examples are electromechanical relays andmotors. Switching off such loads must be carried out with great caution because,when the current is removed, the back EMF across the inductive load can causedamage to the switching device.
To protect any form of switch controlling an inductive DC load, a diode can be
used to block the back EMF (‘inductive kick’) as shown in Figure 8.4.HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 152
Not all drive circuits will fail immediately if subjected to excessive loads and your
test circuit may operate reliably on the bench. However, stressing any drive circuitbeyond its maximum ratings will dramatically shorten its useful life and it will fail inthe field. If in any doubt: over rate by at least a factor of 10 andadd a thermistor.
FIGURE  8.4 Protecting switches against back EMF (‘inductive kick’) with a diode
[Note: This approach is only suitable for use with DC loads.]8051 deviceLogic 0 (0v) to turn motor
PX.YM+12V
MOSFET
74LS06
0Vwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 178 ---
In the case of AC loads, this approach will not work, since the diode will simply
block one phase of the drive voltage. However, we also discussed an alternativeapproach suitable for use with DC loads in Chapter 7: this involved the use of a resis-tor to block the back EMF (Figure 8.5).
A variation on the resistor-based protection scheme is effective and widely applied
to AC load switching: this is known as the RC snubber (Figure 8.6). In most cases,resistor values (R
snubber) of 10 to 10 K Ωand capacitor (Csnubber) 0.01 µF–1 µF are used
(Lander, 1993): values of 100 Ωand 0.05 µF will be acceptable in many circumstances,
but you should investigate this issue carefully for safety-critical applications.
Portability
EM relays may be used with any microcontroller, microprocessor or DSP chip.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
EM relays can control both DC and AC loads, with current from a few mil-
liamps to several thousand amps.
When the contacts are open, there is no leakage: that is, there is a very high
(near infinite) off-state resistance at voltages up to around 1500V.
When closed, the switch contacts present a very low resistance, so that the
power losses in the relay are very low. The relays do not therefore get hot andusually do not require a heat sink.
Purchase costs of EM relays are often lower than semiconductor equivalents
(but see comments about maintenance cost).
Switching times are typically measured in milliseconds rather than the microsec-
ond values found in semiconductor switches.EMR DRIVER 153
FIGURE  8.5 Using a resistor to block back EMF from an inductive load (in this case a DC motor)8051 deviceLogic 0 (0v) to turn motor
PX.YM+12V
MOSFET
74LS06
0VRprotectionwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 179 ---
Like all mechanical switches, the relay contacts will usually exhibit ‘bounce’
behaviour when opened or closed (this bounce behaviour is considered in detailin Chapter 19).
Because EM relays generally do not incorporate zero-crossing detection (see
‘Reliability and safety issues’), they can generate arcs at the switches and, thereby,cause higher levels of EM interference than semiconductor relays.
Unlike semiconductor switches, relays contain moving parts and moving parts
wear out. The mechanical life spans vary, but typical values are around 10 millionto 30 million cycles. At ten cycles per day, a 10 million cycle life span is ‘for ever’:however, at one cycle per millisecond, 10 million cycles translates into aroundthree hours.
If you subject an EM relay to vibration, it is possible to move the switch contacts.
This can be dangerous and / or lead to general system reliability problems.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
It is possible to use EM relays to switch DC loads, but this is rarely a good idea. Forbetter solutions to the DC load control problem, see 
BJT DRIVER [page 124], IC DRIVER
[page 134] and MOSFET DRIVER [page 139].
For alternatives to EM relays for AC load control, see SSR DRIVER (AC)[page 156].HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 154
FIGURE  8.6 Using an RC ‘snubber’ network to protect an EM relay when switching an inductive
AC loadLogic 0 to
run the motor 8051
devicePX.YVdc
PNPVac
250V, 1A
motor
EM
relayMRsnubber
Csnubberwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 180 ---
Example: Controlling a central-heating pump with an 
EM relay
Many central-heating systems require the control of small, low-power pumps. An
example of a typical pump is a Grundfos Selectric UPS 15–50: this requires 240V AC(50 Hz) and 0.17–0.42A. 
Control of central heating is a good use of an EM relay. The heating is switched on
a small number of times per day, so relay life will be long. Maintenance is possible, inthe event of a relay failure. The occasional EM spikes from the system are unlikely tobe troublesome in most domestic environments.
In this case, a reed relay will be capable of carrying the required current. Figure 8.7
shows a possible circuit.
Further reading
—EMR DRIVER 155
FIGURE  8.7 Use of a reed (EM) relay to control a central-heating pumpLogic 0 to
run the pump 8051
devicePX.YVdc250V (AC)
250V, 0.2A (AC) pump
Reed
relayM100Ω
0.05 µFwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 181 ---
HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 156
SSR DRIVER (AC)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate hardware foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you ‘switch on’ or ‘switch off’ a piece of mains-powered (AC) electrical equip-ment using a microcontroller? 
Background
We introduce DC SSRs in SSR DRIVER (DC)[page 144]. Please refer to the previous
pattern for general background information on SSRs.
The main differences between the two devices is that, while in DC SSRs, the output
stage typically consists of a MOSFET, in AC SSRs, the output stage is usually a TRIAC.Very briefly, a TRIAC is a semiconductor switch that allows current to flow in bothdirections: this is, of course, precisely what we require with AC loads. 
Solution
Use of SSRs is generally straightforward: the inputs are directly compatible withmicrocontroller port values, and – because of the built-in opto-isolation – there is gen-erally no need to add additional gates between the microcontroller and the SSR. Theexamples that follow will illustrate the use of these devices.
Pull-up resistors
When using this pattern, you may need to incorporate pull-up resistors in your hard-ware design. See 
NAKED LED [page 110] for further details.
Reliability and safety issues
See the start of this chapter for general reliability and safety issues.
See also SSR DRIVER (DC)[page 144] for basic SSR guidelines.
A key difference between AC and DC SSRs is that, while MOSFETs have very low
losses, the TRIAC output stages used in AC SSRs typically have a voltage drop of up to1.5V when they conduct: this translates directly into a power loss of up to 1.5W perAmpere of current. If using a high-power device (greater than around 4A), you willrequire a heat sink.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 182 ---
Portability
SSRs can be used with any processor type. However, there are other portability issues
to consider.
The most important (already briefly mentioned) is that an AC SSR cannot be used
to switch DC. The reason for this is that the AC SSR contains zero-crossing detectioncircuits. Because the DC supply never crosses zero, the SSR will never switch on.
Similarly, most DC SSRs are based on MOSFETs. Using a MOSFET to switch AC
is ineffective: at best, the device will act as a form of rectifier for a short period, untilit overheats.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SSRs do not exhibit switch bounce.
SSRs do not wear out (in normal use).SSRs do not generate acoustic noise.Many (AC) SSRs incorporate ‘zero-crossing detection’ circuits. This helps to
greatly reduce EM emissions.
SSRs are resistant to shock and vibration. SSRs have a high switching speed.
SSRs have high levels of isolation between the ‘control’ and ‘switching’ circuits.
EM relays can usually switch higher voltages and currents. The on-resistance of AC SSRs is much larger than EM relays. This means extra
heat is generated and you must plan for a heat sink or other forms of cooling. 
Unlike an EM relay, the ‘switch’ in the AC SSR (usually a TRIAC) exhibits some
leakage current in the off-state. 
Most AC SSRs will not switch DC, partly because of the zero-crossing detection.SSRs can be irrevocably damaged almost instantly by excessive voltage and / or
current: EM relays are more forgiving.
The typical failure mode of an SSR is an output short circuit: this can be
dangerous.
The ‘switched’ side has a minimum operating voltage and current: these may
be quite high, which can make it more difficult to perform initial tests onsmall-scale prototypes.SSR DRIVER (AC) 157
When you fit a heat sink, keep it isolated from the case of your application. Never
bolt it to the chassis: this can have deadly consequences.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 183 ---
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See the other patterns in this chapter and Chapter 7 for alternative approaches.
Example: Controlling a central-heating pump with an SSR
In EMR DRIVER [page 149] we present an example of a small reed relay used to
control a central-heating pump. Here we consider an alternative solution using anAC SSR.
Recall that the pump we wish to control was a Grundfos Selectric UPS 15-50: this
required 240V AC (50 Hz), and 0.17–0.42A. In this case, we will use a CrydomMP240D3 SSR. This is suitable for direct interfacing to a microcontroller and has acurrent capacity of 3A continuous (80A surge) at up to 280V AC. Figure 8.8 shows asuitable circuit.
Overall, control of central heating in this manner is probably best carried out
using an EM relay. The heating is switched on a small number of times per day,so relay life will be long. Maintenance is possible, in the event of a relay failure.The occasional EM spikes from the system are unlikely to be troublesome in mostdomestic environments. 
In this case, the EM relay is a better solution, and costs around 20% of the price of
the SSR.
Further reading
—HARDWARE FOUNDATIONS 158
FIGURE  8.8 Use of a Crydom solid-state relay to control a central-heating pumpLogic 0 to
turn motor 8051
devicePX.YVdc250V (AC)
250V, 0.2A (AC) pump
M100Ω
0.05 µF
MP240D3
SSR
('AC ground': 'control' and 'switch'
circuits are isolated)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 184 ---
Software foundations
The chapters in Part A focused on the development of an appropriate hardware
environment to meet the needs of your embedded application. In Part B, we consider thecorresponding software foundation.
In Chapter 9, we describe the minimum software environment required to create an
embedded application.
In Chapter 10, we consider software techniques suitable for use with the AC and DC
driver hardware discussed in Chapters 7 and 8.
In Chapter 11, we explore software- and hardware-based techniques for producing delays.In Chapter 12, we look at the topic of watchdogs timers and consider how these may be
used to improve the reliability of your application.part bwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 185 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 186 ---
A rudimentary software 
architecture
Introduction
In the first pattern in this chapter we consider the minimum software environment
required to create a typical embedded application: this environment is called SUPER
LOOP [page 162].
The second pattern ( PROJECT HEADER [page 169) is a practical implementation of a
standard software design guideline: ‘Do not duplicate information in numerous files;place the common information in a single file and refer to it where necessary.’Specifically, 
PROJECT HEADER pulls together the information connected with the par-
ticular microcontroller used in your application, along with other key pieces ofinformation that are required by many of the files in your project.chapter9
Please note that we will use Super Loop in this book primarily to allow us to illus-
trate some introductory software patterns in Chapters 10, 11 and 12. In Chapter 13we will demonstrate that a co-operative scheduler provides a more appropriateenvironment than a 
SUPER LOOP for the great majority of embedded applications.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 187 ---
SUPER LOOP
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontroller.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
What is the minimum software environment you need to create an embedded C program?
Background
—
Solution
One key difference between embedded systems and desktop computer systems is thatthe vast majority of embedded systems are required to run only one program. Thisprogram will start running when the microcontroller is powered up and will stop run-ning when the power is removed.
A software architecture that is frequently used to generate the required behaviour is
illustrated in Listings 9.1 to 9.3.
/*----------------------------------------------------------------- *-
Main.C
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Architecture of a simple Super Loop application[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "X.h"/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Prepare for task X X_Init();while(1) // 'for ever' (Super Loop)SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 162www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 188 ---
{
X();  // Perform the task}
}
/* -----------------------------------------------------------------*-
-------END OF FILE ---------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.1 Part of a simple Super Loop demonstration
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
X.H
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see X.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// Function prototypes 
void X_Init(void); void X(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
----- END OF FILE -----------------------------------------------
-*---------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.2 Part of a simple Super Loop demonstration
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
X.C
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Task'for a demonstration Super Loop application
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*//*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void X_Init(void)
{// Prepare for task X// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SUPER LOOP 163www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 189 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 164
void X(void)
{// Perform task X// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
-----END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.3 Part of a simple Super Loop demonstration
Listings 9.1 to 9.3 illustrate a simple embedded architecture, capable of running a
single task (the function X()) . After performing some system initialization (through
the function Init_System()) , the application runs the task ‘X’ repeatedly, until
power is removed from the system.
Hardware resource implications
SUPER LOOP has no significant hardware resource implications. It uses no timers,
ports or other facilities. It requires only a few bytes of program code. It is impossibleto create, in C, a working environment requiring fewer system resources.
Reliability and safety implications
Applications based on SUPER LOOP can be both reliable and safe, because the overall
architecture is very simple and easy to understand and no aspect of the underlyinghardware is hidden from the original developer or from the person who subsequentlyhas to maintain the system. If, by contrast, you are programming for Windows or asimilarly complex desktop environment (including Linux or Unix), you are not incomplete control: if someone else wrote poor code in a library, it may crash your pro-gram. With a ‘super looping’ application, there is nobody else to blame. This can beparticularly attractive in safety-related applications.
Please note, however, that just because an application is based on a Super Loop does
not mean that it is safe. Indeed, in general, a Super Loop does not provide thefacilities needed in an embedded application: in particular, it does not provide a mecha-nism for calling functions at predetermined time intervals. As we discussed in Chapter1, these are key characteristics of most embedded applications: if you need such facili-ties, a scheduler (see Chapter 13) is almost always a more reliable environment.Crucially, the ‘Super Loop’, or ‘endless loop’, is required because we have no operating
system to return to: our application will keep looping until the system power is removed.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 190 ---
SUPER LOOP 165
Portability
Any ‘C’ compiler intended for embedded applications will compile a Super Loop
program: the loop is based entirely on ISO/ANSI ‘C’. The code is therefore inherentlyportable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
The main strength of Super Loop systems is their simplicity. This makes them(comparatively) easy to build, debug, test and maintain.
Super Loops are highly efficient: they have minimal hardware resource
implications.
Super Loops are highly portable.If your application requires accurate timing (for example, you need to acquire
data precisely every 2 ms), then this framework will not provide the accuracy orflexibility you require.
The basic Super Loop operates at ‘full power’ (normal operating mode) at all times.
This may not be necessary in all applications, and can have a dramatic impact onsystem power consumption. Again, a scheduler can address this problem.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In most circumstances, a scheduler will be a more appropriate choice: see Chapter 13.
Example: Central-heating controller
Suppose we wish to develop a microcontroller-based control system to be used as partof the central-heating system in a building. The simplest version of this system mightconsist of a gas-fired boiler (which we wish to control), a sensor (measuring roomtemperature), a temperature dial (through which the desired temperature is specified)and the control system itself (Figure 9.1).
We assume that the boiler, temperature sensor and temperature dial are connected
to the system via appropriate ports. We further assume that the control system is tobe implemented in ‘C’.
FIGURE  9.1 An overview of the required central heating controllerBoilerCentral
heating
controller
Temperature
dialTemperature
sensorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 191 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 166
Here, precise timing is not required, and a Super Loop framework similar to that
shown in Listings 9.4 to 9.6 may be appropriate.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C
------------------------------------------------------------------
Framework for a central heating system using 'Super Loop '.
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Cen_Heat.h "
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Init the system C_HEAT_Init();
while(1) // 
'for ever'(Super Loop)
{// Find out what temperature the user requires// (via the user interface)C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature();
// Find out what the current room temperature is 
// (via temperature sensor)C_HEAT_Get_Actual_Temperature();
// Adjust the gas burner, as required
C_HEAT_Control_Boiler();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
----- END OF FILE -----------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.4 Part of the code for a simple central-heating system
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cen_Heat.H
-----------------------------------------------------------------www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 192 ---
- see Cen_Heat.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// Function prototypes 
void C_HEAT_Init(void);void C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature(void); void C_HEAT_Get_Actual_temperature(void); void C_HEAT_Control_Boiler(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.5 Part of the code for a simple central-heating system
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cen_Heat.C
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Framework for a central heating system using 'Super Loop '.
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void C_HEAT_Init(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void C_HEAT_Get_Actual_temperature(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SUPER LOOP 167www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 193 ---
void C_HEAT_Control_Boiler(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
-------- END OF FILE --------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 9.6 Part of the code for a simple central-heating system
Further reading
— SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 168www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 194 ---
PROJECT HEADER 169
PROJECT HEADER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you group together all the information relating to the hardware platformused in your project?
Background
—
Solution
As we saw in Chapter 3, the 8051 family shares a common set of core facilities.However, it is a family – rather than a group of clones – and the different family
members have different features and facilities. For example, some devices require12 oscillator cycles per instruction, while others perform the same instruction in 6, 4or even 1 oscillator cycle (see Chapters 3 and 4).
If you create an application using a particular 8051 device operating at a particular
oscillator frequency, this information will be required when compiling many of thedifferent source files in your project. This information will also be required by anyonewho wishes to use your code.
The ‘Project Header’ is simply a header file, included in all projects, that groups all
of this information in one place. As such, it is a practical implementation of a stan-dard software design guideline: ‘Do not duplicate information in numerous files;place the common information in a single file, and refer to it where necessary.’
In the case of the great majority of the examples in this book, we use a Project
Header file. This is always called Main.H. An example of a typical project header file
is included in Listing 9.7. Please note that this is a real example and not all of thefeatures of this file have yet been considered in this book.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Project Header for project LCD_KEY (see Chapter 22)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 195 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#ifndef _MAIN_H#define _MAIN_H
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// WILL NEED TO EDIT THIS SECTION FOR EVERY PROJECT//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Must include the appropriate microcontroller header file here
#include <AT89 ×52.h>
// Must include oscillator / chip details here if delays are used
// -// Oscillator / resonator frequency (in Hz) e.g. (11059200UL)#define OSC_FREQ (11059200UL)// Number of oscillations per instruction (6 or 12)#define OSC_PER_INST (12)
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// SHOULD NOT NEED TO EDIT THE SECTIONS BELOW//----------------------------------------------------------------------typedef unsigned char tByte; typedef unsigned int  tWord; typedef unsigned long tLong;
// Misc #defines
#ifndef TRUE#define FALSE 0#define TRUE (!FALSE)#endif
#define RETURN_NORMAL (bit) 0
#define RETURN_ERROR (bit) 1
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Interrupts// – see Chapter 12.//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Generic 8051 timer interrupts (used in most schedulers)
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow 1#define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Additional interrupts (used in shared-clock schedulers) 
#define INTERRUPT_UART Rx_Tx 4 #define INTERRUPT_CAN_c515c 17
// ---------------------------------------------------------------------SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 170www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 196 ---
PROJECT HEADER 171
// Error codes 
// – see Chapter 13.//----------------------------------------------------------------------
#define ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS (1)
#define ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK (2)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK (0xAA)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER (0xAA)
#define ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START (0xA0)
#define ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE (0x80)
#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64 (11) 
#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64 (12) #define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE (13) #define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE (14)
#define ERROR_USART_TI (21) 
#define ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR (22)
#endif
//======================================================================
Listing 9.7 An example of a typical project headerfile (Main. H)
Hardware resource implications
There are no hardware resource implications.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of PROJECT HEADER can help to improve reliability, not least because it helps to
make your code more readable, because anyone using your projects knows where tofind key information, such as the model of microcontroller and the oscillator frequency.
Use of P
ROJECT HEADER can help to improve the reliability of applications which
are subsequently ported to a different microcontroller, as discussed in the remainderof this chapter.
Portability
The use of a project header can help to make your code more easily portable, by plac-ing some of the key rnicrocontroller-dependent data in one place.
In addition, the typedef statements in the file create three key user-defined types
which are used in all of the projects in this book:
typedef unsigned char tByte;
typedef unsigned int  tWord; typedef unsigned long tLong;www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 197 ---
Thus, in the projects you will see code like this:
tWord Temperature;
Rather than:
unsigned int Temperature;
If the code is ported into – say – a 16-bit environment, changes to only three
typedef statements are required in order to adapt the variable sizes to a new com-
piler. Without the use of these user-defined types, porting the code becomes morecomplicated and error prone.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
PROJECT HEADER can help to make your code more readable, not least because
anyone using your projects knows where to find key information, such as themodel of microcontroller and the oscillator frequency.
PROJECT HEADER can help to make your code more easily portable.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See PORT HEADER [page 184].
Examples
Almost every example project on the CD includes a project header file. Search for thefile Main.H .
Further reading
—SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 172www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 198 ---
Using the ports
Introduction
The first pattern in this chapter ( PORT I /O[page 174]) is concerned with basic soft-
ware techniques for interacting with the digital ports on an 8051 microcontroller.
The second pattern ( PORT HEADER [page 184]) encapsulates a design guideline that
helps you cope with the fact that many different components in a larger project willeach require port access: specifically, 
PORT HEADER demonstrates how the port access
for the whole project can be integrated into a single file. Use of these techniques canease project development, maintenance and porting.
The following points should also be noted:
GThis chapter does not consider the hardware that will be connected to the port: seeChapters 7 and 8 for relevant hardware details.
GThis chapter does not consider analog input and output: for this, see Part G.chapter 10www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 199 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 174
PORT I /O
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you write software to read from and /or write to the ports on an (8051)microcontroller?
Background
The Standard 8051s have four 8-bit ports. All of the ports are bidirectional: that is,they may be used for both input and output.
To limit the size of the device, some of the port pins have alternative functions. For
example, as we saw in Chapter 6, Ports 0, 2 (and part of Port 3) together provide theaddress and data bus used to support access to external memory. Similarly, two fur-ther pins on Port 3 (pins 0 and 1) also provide access to the on-chip USART (seeChapter 18). When in their ‘alternative roles’, these pins cannot be used for ordinaryinput or output. As a result, on the original members of the 8051 family, where exter-nal memory is used, only Port 1 is available for general-purpose I/O operations.
These comments all refer to the Standard 8051: the number of available ports on
8051 microcontrollers varies enormously: the Small 8051s have the equivalent ofapproximately two ports and the Extended 8051s have up to ten ports (see Chapter3). Despite these differences, the control of ports on all members of the 8051 family iscarried out in the same way.
Solution
Control of the 8051 ports through software is carried out using what are known as‘special function registers’ (SFRs). The SFRs are 8-bit latches: in practical terms, thismeans that the values written to the port are held there until a new value is written orthe device is reset.
Each of the four basic ports on the Standard 8051 family, as well as any additional
ports, is represented by an SFR: these are named, appropriately, P0, P1, P2, P3 and soon. Physically, the SFR is a area of memory in the upper areas of internal RAM: P0 isat address 0x80, P1 at address 0x90, P2 at address 0xA0 and P3 at address 0xB0.
If we want to read from the ports, we need to read from these addresses. Assuming
that we are using a C compiler, the process of writing to an address is usually bywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 200 ---
means of a SFR variable ‘declaration’, hidden in a header file. Thus, a typical SFR
header file for an 8051 family device will contain the lines:
sfr P0 = 0x80;
sfr P1 = 0x90; sfr P2 = 0xA0; sfr P3 = 0xB0;
Having declared the SFR variables, we can write to the ports in a straightforward
manner. For example, we can send some data to Port 1 as follows:
unsigned char Port_data:
Port_data = 0x0F;P1 = Port_data; // Write 00001111 to Port 1
Similarly, we can read from (for example) Port 1 as follows:
unsigned char Port_data;P1 = 0xFF; // Set the port to 
'read mode '
Port_data = P1; // Read from the port
Note that, in order to read from a pin, we need to ensure that the last thing written
to the pin was a ‘1’. Because the reset value of the ports is 0xFF (see ‘Port reset values’,page 178), it is tempting to assume that writing this value is unnecessary and that wecan get away with the following version:
unsigned char Port_data;
// Assume nothing written to port since reset
// - DANGEROUS!!! Port_data = P1;
The problem with this code is that, in simple test programs it works: this can lull
the developer into a false sense of security. If, at a later date, someone modifies theprogram to include a routine for writing to all or part of the same port, this code willnot generally work as required:
unsigned char Port-data:
P1 = 0x00;...// Assumes nothing written to port since reset 
// - WON
'T ALWAYS WORK 
Port_data = P1;
In general, we use initialization functions to set the ports to a known state at the
start of the program. Where this is not possible, it is safer to always write ‘1’ to anyport pin before reading from it, as was illustrated in the first example.PORT I/O 175www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 201 ---
Note that, in the last example, we assume that we wished to read from or write to an
entire port. More commonly, we might wish (for example) to control an LED isconnected to a single output pin. For example, assuming that the LED is connected toPin 0 on Port 3 of an 8051-family microcontroller, we can flash the diode by control-ling the whole port, as follows:
P3 = 0xFF:
... // delayP3 = 0x00;... // delayP3 = 0xFF ;... // etc
Alternatively, we can make use of an sbit variable in the C51 compiler to provide
a finer level of control. At the same time, we consider the fact that – depending onthe hardware (see Chapter 7) – the LED may be lit using a logic 1 or a logic 0 outputon the port pin and we make the software flexible enough to deal easily with subse-quent hardware changes:
#define LED_PORT P3
#define LED_ON 0        // Easy to change the logic here
#define LED_OFF 1
sbit Warning_led = LED_PORT^0;  // LED is connected to 4.0...Warning_led = LED_ON;
... // delayWarning_led = LED_OFF;... // delayWarning_led = LED_ON:... // etc
Reliability and safety implications
Port reset values
After the system is reset, the contents of the various port special function registers
(SFRs) are set to 0xFF. This fact has very important safety and reliability implications.
Consider, for example, that you have connected a motorized device to a port and
that the device is activated by a ‘logic 1’ output. When the microcontroller is reset, themotorized device will be activated. Even if you change the port outputs to 0 at the startof your program, the motor will be ‘pulsed’ briefly. This can, in some systems, lead tothe injury or even death of users of the system or those in the immediate vicinity.
Because the output pins are ‘reset high’ it is important to ensure that any devices
which have safety implications are connected to the microcontroller in such a waySOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 176www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 202 ---
PORT I/O 177
that they are ‘active low’: that is, that an output of ‘0’ on the relevant port pin will
activate the device.
Port I/O and memory access
One of the most common errors made by inexperienced 8051 developers is to con-tinue to use P0, P2 or P3 as normal I/O ports when using external memory (seeChapter 8 for details of memory usage).
If you use external memory, you cannot safely use P0 and P2 for any other purpose
and you must also take care when writing to Port 3.
For example, any statement similar to this:
P3 = AD_data;
is potentially catastrophic if external memory is being used.
Instead, make use of sbit variables to ensure you only write to ‘safe’ port pins (see
‘Example: Reading and writing bits’ for details).
Hardware resource implications
All port I/O involves the use of port pins. As we discussed earlier, if these pins areused for I/O, then they are not generally available for other purposes.
Note that all Extended 8051s provide additional ports. On the 80C515C, for exam-
ple, there are eight 8-bit ports: these include the ‘standard’ ports (0–3), plus one 8-bitport with alternate A/D conversion functions and three further ports.
Portability
Port access in general and the keywords bitand sbit in particular are not part of the
ISO / ANSI C language: therefore, by definition, this code is not totally portable.
That said, this code can be used (with the standard Keil compiler) across the whole
of the 8051 range. With minor modifications it can be used with other 8051 compil-ers, all of which provide similar facilities.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
This pattern allows flexible and efficient access to the 8051 ports, makingfull use of the internal BDATA memory area (discussed in Chapter 6).
As noted earlier, port access in general and the keywords bitand sbit in partic-
ular are not part of the ISO / ANSI C language: therefore, by definition, this codeis not totally portable. Note that, while perhaps less than ideal, this problemcannot be avoided.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 203 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 178
Related patterns and alternative solutions
Hardware issues
This pattern does not deal with external hardware: see Part A (particularly Chapters 7
and 8) and Part C for patterns that cover these issues.
Interrupt inputs
For reasons discussed in Chapter 1, we make very limited use of interrupt inputs inthis book.
Example: Reading and writing bytes
Listing 10.1 illustrates how we can read from a collection of eight switches connectedto a port on an 8051-family microcontroller and ‘echo’ these switch settings on anoutput port: using 
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399], NAKED LED [page 110]
and IC BUFFER [page 118] we could, for example, use this code to display the switch
settings on a panel of LEDs.
Note, however, that you do not require any hardware to try out this code: the Keil
hardware simulator (included on the CD) allows you to simulate suitable hardware.Figure 10.1 shows the output from one such simulation.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for pattern PORT I-OReads from P1 and copies the value to P2.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/FIGURE  10.1 The output from the program in Listing 10-1 produced using the Keil hardware simulator
included on the CD.The output portThe input portwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 204 ---
PORT I/O 179
// File Main.H is detailed in Chapter 9 
#include <Main.H>
/*..................................................................*/void main (void)
{unsigned char Port1_value;
// Must set up P1 for reading
P1 = 0xFF;
while(l)
{// Read the value of P1 Port1_value = P1;
// Copy the value to P2 
P2 = Port1_value;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
--------- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------
--*-----------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.1 A simple Super Loop application which copies the values from P1 to P2
Example: Reading and writing bits
Listing 10.1 demonstrated how to read from or write to an entire port. Consider
another common problem: reading and writing individual pins on a port. This prob-lem arises because often the various parts of a port will be serving different purposes.
Suppose, for example, that we have a switch connected to Port 1 (pin 3) and an
LED connected to Port 1 (pin 4) and also have other input and output devices con-nected to the other pins on this port. How do we read from pin 3 and write to pin 4without disrupting anything else?
We can do this by making use of the bitwise AND, OR and ‘complement’ operators.
These, and other, bitwise operators are not widely used by desktop developers. Thevarious bitwise operators allow a number of data manipulations that are invaluable inembedded applications. Some examples of the use of these operators are given inListing 10.2. Note that this file is written in ISO ‘C’ (’Desktop C’): it cannot be run onthe Keil compiler.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.Cwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 205 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 180
----------------------- ~ ----------------------------------------
Test program for pattern PORT I-OIllustrating the use of bitwise operators
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include <stdio.h> void Display_Byte(const unsigned char); /*.................................................................*/ int main()
{unsigned char x = 0xFE;unsigned int y = 0x0A0B;
printf(
"%-35s","X");
Display_Byte(x);
printf("%-35s","1s complement [~x] ");
Display_Byte(~x);
printf("%-35s","Bitwise AND [x & 0x0f] ");   
Display_Byte(x & 0x0f);
printf("%-35s","Bitwise OR [x | 0x0f] "); 
Display_Byte(x | 0x0f); 
printf("%-35s","Bitwise XOR [x ^ 0x0f] "); 
Display_Byte(x ^ 0x0f);
printf("%-35s","Left shift, 1 place [x <<= 1] ");
Display_Byte(x <<= 1);
x = 0xFE; /* Return x to original value */
printf("%-35s","Right shift, 4 places [x >>= 4] "); 
Display_Byte(x >>= 4); 
printf("\n\n");
printf("%-35s","Display MS byte of unsigned int y ");
Display_Byte((unsigned char) (y >> 8));
printf("%-35s","Display LS byte of unsigned int y ");
Display_Byte(unsigned char) (y & 0xFF));
return 0:
}www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 206 ---
PORT I/O 181
/*-----------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Display_Byte(const unsigned char Ch)
{unsigned char i, c = Ch; unsigned char Mask = 1 << 7; 
for (i = 1: i <= 8: i++)
{putchar(c & Mask ? 
'1': '0'); 
C <<= 1;}
putchar(
'\n');
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
-------- END OF FILE --------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.2 Demonstrating the C bitwise operators
The output from the program in Listing 10.2 is as follows: 
X 1111111O
1s complement [~x] OOOOOOO1Bitwise AND [x & OXOf] OOOO111OBitwise OR [x | OxOf] 11111111Bitwise XOR [x ^ OXOf] 1111OOO1Left shift, 1 place [x <<= 1] 111111OO
Right shift, 4 places [x >>= 4] OOOO1111
Display MS byte of unsigned int y OOOO1O1O
Display LS byte of unsigned int y OOOO1O11
The use of some of these operators in an embedded application is illustrated in
Listing 10.3 which echoes the input on Pin X to Pin Y on Port 1.
/*-------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for pattern PORT I-OIllustrating the use of bitwise operatorsReading and writing individual bits
NOTE: Both bits on same port
-*-------------------------------------------------------------------*/www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 207 ---
// File Main.H is detailed in Chapter 9 
#include <Main.H>
void Write_Bit_P1(unsigned char, bit);
bit Read_Bit_P1(unsigned char);
/*.................................................................*/void main (void)
{bit x;
for(;;) // Forever ...
{x = Read_Bit_P1(0);   // Read Port 1, Pin 0Write_Bit_P1(1,x);    // Write to Port 1, Pin 1}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void Write_Bit_P1(unsigned char Pin, bit Value)
{unsigned char p = 1; p <<= Pin;  // Left shift
// If we want 1 output at this pin
if (Value)
{P1 |= p;  // Bitwise OR return;}
// If we want 0 output at this pin 
p = ~p;  // ComplementP1 &= p;  // Bitwise AND}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit Read_Bit_P1(unsigned char Pin)
{unsigned char p = 1; p <<= Pin;  // Left shift
// Write a 1 to the pin (to set up for reading) 
Write_Bit_P1(Pin, 1);SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 182www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 208 ---
return (P1 & p); // Read the pin
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
--------- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.3 Reading and writing bits
Example: Displaying error codes in a scheduler
See CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255], where error codes are displayed on a bank
of LEDs connected to a port.
Example: Controlling an LCD
See LCD CHARACTER PANEL [page 467], where control of individual port pins is used
to send data to an LCD panel.
Further reading
Further information about the use of the ‘C’ bitwise operators will be found in anystandard textbook on C programming.PORT I/O 183www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 209 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 184
PORT HEADER
Context
G You are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
Problem
How do you manage port access allocations in a larger project?
Background
In a typical embedded project, you may have a user interface created using an LCD, a
keypad and one or more single LEDs. There may be a serial (RS-485) link to anothermicrocontroller board. There may be one or more high-power devices (say three-phase industrial motors) controlled by your application.
Each of these (software) components in your application will require exclusive
access to one or more port pins. The project may include 10–20 different source files.How do you ensure that changes to port access in one component do not impact onanother? How do you ensure that it is easy to port the application to an environmentwhere different port pins must be used?
These issues are addressed through the simple
PORT HEADER design pattern.
Solution
PORT HEADER encapsulates a simple but effective design guideline that can help you
cope with the fact that many different components in a larger project will eachrequire port access: specifically, using P
ORT HEADER , you will pull together the differ-
ent port access features for the whole project into a single (header) file. Use of thistechnique can ease project development, maintenance and porting.
Port Header is simple to understand and simple to apply.Consider, for example, that we have three C files in a project (A, B, C), each of
which requires access to one or more port pins, or to a complete port.
File A may include the following:
// File A
sbit Pin_A = P3^2;...
File B may include the following:
// File B#define Port_B = P0;...www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 210 ---
PORT HEADER 185
File C may include the following:
// File C
sbit Pin_C = P2^7;...
In this version of the code, all of the port access requirements are spread over mul-
tiple files. Instead of this, there are many advantages obtained by integrating all portaccess in a single Port.H header file:
//----- Port.H -----
// Port access for File B 
#define Port_B = P0;
// Port access for File A 
sbit Pin_A = P3^2;
// Port access for File C 
sbit Pin_C = P2^7;
...
Each of the remaining project files will then #include Port.H .
Listing 10.4 shows a complete example of a Port.H file from a real application.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (vl.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------’Port Header’ for the project LCD_KEY (see Chapter 22)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*///------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required 
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS 
// The port on which error codes will be displayed // ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED #define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Keypad.C ------------------------------------------------#define KEYPAD_PORT P0sbit C1 = KEYPAD_PORT^0; 
sbit C2 = KEYPAD_PORT^1; www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 211 ---
sbit C3 = KEYPAD_PORT^2;
sbit R1 = KEYPAD_PORT^6; 
sbit R2 = KEYPAD_PORT^5;sbit R3 = KEYPAD_PORT^4;sbit R4 = KEYPAD_PORT^3;
// ------ LCD_A.c ---------------------------------------------------// NOTE: Any combination of 6 pins may be used (any ports, any order)
// NOTE: Number in [] are pin numbers on *MANY* LCDs
sbit LCD_D4 = P1^0; // DB4 [11]
sbit LCD_D5 = P1^1; // DB5 [12]sbit LCD_D6 = P1^2; // DB6 [13]sbit LCD_D7 = P1^3; // DB7 [14]
sbit LCD_RS = P1^4; // Display register select output [4]
sbit LCD_EN = P1^5; // Display enable output [6]
// Connect Vss [1] on LCD to Gnd
// Connect Vcc [2] on LCD to +5V// Connect Vo  [3] on LCD to Gnd// Connect RW  [5] on LCD to Gnd
// ------ LED_Flas.C ------------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor 
// [see Chapter 7 for details] sbit LED_pin = P1^5;
/*-----------------------------------------------------------------*-
-------- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------
--*----------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.4 An example of a real Port Headerfile ( Port.H ) from a project using an 
interface consisting of a keypad and liquid crystal display
Hardware resource implications
There are no hardware resource implications.
Reliability and safety implications
Despite its simplicity, Port Header can improve reliability and safety, because it avoids
potential conflicts between port pins, particularly during the maintenance phase ofthe project when developers (who may not have been involved in the original design)are required to make code changes.SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 186www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 212 ---
PORT HEADER 187
Portability
Port Header is itself portable: it can be used with any microcontroller and is not
linked to the 8051 family. Use of Port Header also improves portability, by makingaccessible in one location all the port access requirements of the application.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
PORT HEADER is both simple and effective – use it!
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See PROJECT HEADER [page 169].
Example: LED bargraph display
Suppose we wish to test an application involving an analog-to-digital converter.Specifically we want to display the voltage reading on a set of 8 LEDs connected toPort 1 of our 8051 device (Figure 10.2).
The key software files required to create this application follow (Listings 10.5 to
10.8): a complete set of the source files for the project is included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.H (v1.00)
-----------------------------------------------------------------
'Project Header '(see Chapter 9) for the project BARGRAPH
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#ifndef _MAIN_H
#define _MAIN_HFIGURE  10.2 Hardware for an LED bargraph display.8051 devicePort 2
ULN2803AP2.0 - Pin 8
P2.1 - Pin 7P2.2 - Pin 6P2.3 - Pin 5P2.4 - Pin 4P2.5 - Pin 3P2.6 - Pin 2P2.7 - Pin 1
Pin 11 - LED 0
Pin 12 - LED 1Pin 13 - LED 2Pin 14 - LED 3Pin 15 - LED 4Pin 16 - LED 5Pin 17 - LED 6Pin 18 - LED 7
9LED 7 LED 6 LED 5 LED 4 LED 3 LED 2 LED 1 LED 0Vcc
RledRledRledRledRledRledRledRledFor 25mA LEDs, Rled = 120 Ohmswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 213 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 188
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// WILL NEED TO EDIT THIS SECTION FOR EVERY PROJECT//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Must include the appropriate microcontroller header file here
#include <AT89x52.h>
// Must include oscillator / chip details here if delays are used
//// Oscillator / resonator frequency (in Hz) e.g. (11059200UL) #define OSC_FREQ (12000000UL)// Number of oscillations per instruction (6 or 12) #define OSC_PER_INST (12)
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// SHOULD NOT NEED TO EDIT THE SECTIONS BELOW//----------------------------------------------------------------------typedef unsigned char tByte;typedef unsigned int  tWord;typedef unsigned long tLong;
// Misc #defines
#ifndef TRUE#define FALSE 0#define TRUE (!FALSE)#endif
#define RETURN_NORMAL (bit) 0
#define RETURN_ERROR (bit) 1
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Interrupts// - see Chapter 12.//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Generic 8051 timer interrupts (used in most schedulers)
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow 1#define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Additional interrupts (used in shared-clock schedulers)
#define INTERRUPT_UART Rx_Tx 4#define INTERRUPT_CAN_c515c 17
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
// Error codes// - see Chapter 13.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 214 ---
PORT HEADER 189
//----------------------------------------------------------------------
#define ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS (1)
#define ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK (2)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK (0xAA)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER (0xAA)
#define ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START (0xA0)
#define ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE (0x80)
#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64 (11)
#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64 (12)#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE (13)#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE (14)
#define ERROR_USART_TI (21)
#define ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR (22)
#endif
//======================================================================
Listing 10.5 Part of a small library for creating an LED bargraph display
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' for the project BARGRAPH
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*///------ Bargraph.C ------------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details] // The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if requiredsbit Pin0 = P1^0; sbit Pin1 = P1^1; sbit Pin2 = P1^2; sbit Pin3 = P1^3; sbit Pin4 = P1^4; sbit PinS = P1^5;sbit Pin6 = P1^6; sbit Pin7 = P1^7;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 215 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 190
Listing 10.6 Part of a small library for creating an LED bargraph display
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for bargraph display
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Main.h"
#include "Bargraph.h "
// ------ Public variable declarations ----------------------------
extern tBargraph Data_G;
/* .................................................................*/
/* .................................................................*/
void main(void)
{tWord x;
BARGRAPH_Init();while(1)
{if (++x == 1000)
{x = 0;Data_G++;}
BARGRAPH_Update();
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---------- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.7 Part of a small library for creating an LED bargraph display
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Bargraph.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 216 ---
Simple bargraph library.  See Chapter 10.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Bargraph.h "
//------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
// The data to be displayed 
tBargraph Data_G;
// ------ Private constants ---------------------------------------#define BARGRAPH_ON (1)
#define BARGRAPH_OFF (0)
//------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// These variables store the thresholds 
// used to update the display static tBargraph M9_1_G:static tBargraph M9_2_G;static tBargraph M9_3_G;static tBargraph M9_4_G;static tBargraph M9_5_G;static tBargraph M9_6_G:static tBargraph M9_7_G;static tBargraph M9_8_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
BARGRAPH_Init()Prepare for the bargraph display.-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void BARGRAPH_Init(void)
{Pin0 = BARGRAPH_OFF; Pin1 = BARGRAPH_OFF: Pin2 = BARGRAPH_OFF; Pin3 = BARGRAPH_OFF; Pin4 = BARGRAPH_OFF; Pin5 = BARGRAPH_OFF; Pin6 = BARGRAPH_OFF;Pin7 = BARGRAPH_OFF;PORT HEADER 191www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 217 ---
// Use a linear scale to display data
// Remember: *9* possible output states // - do all calculations ONCEM9_1_G = (BARGRAPH_MAX – BARGRAPH_MIN) / 9;M9_2_G = M9_1_G * 2:M9_3_G = M9_1_G * 3;M9_4_G = M9_1_G * 4;M9_5_G = M9_1_G * 5;M9_6_G = M9_1_G * 6;M9_7_G = M9_1_G * 7;M9_8_G = M9_1_G * 8:}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
BARGRAPH_Update()Update the bargraph display.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void BARGRAPH_Update(void)
{tBargraph Data = Data_G – BARGRAPH_MIN;
PinO = ((Data >= M9_1_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); 
Pin1 = ((Data >= M9_2_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin2 = ((Data >= M9_3_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin3 = ((Data >= M9_4_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin4 = ((Data >= M9_5_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin5 = ((Data >= M9_6_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin6 = ((Data >= M9_7_G) == BARGRAPH_ON); Pin7 = ((Data >= M9_8_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);}
/*------------------------ -----------------------------------------*-
-------- END OF FILE --------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 10.8 Part of a small library for creating an LED bargraph display
Further reading
—SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 192www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 218 ---
Delays
Introduction
The creation of accurate delays are key requirements in many embedded applications.
In this chapter we will consider two different techniques that may be used to pro-
vide such facilities:
GHARDWARE DELAY [page 194] which is capable of producing precise delays through
the use of one of the on-chip timers. Particularly suitable for generating delays ofaround 0.1 ms or more.
GSOFTWARE DELAY [page 206] which is a simple technique that requires no hardware
resources. The most flexible form of delay mechanism that is particularly suitablefor generating short delays (measured in microseconds) or where timer resourcesare not available.chapter 11www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 219 ---
HARDWARE DELAY
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
You need to wait for a fixed period of time (measured in milliseconds) before takingsome action. 
Background
—
Solution
All members of the 8051 family have at least two 16-bit timer / counters, known asTimer 0 and Timer 1. These timers can be used to generate accurate delays.
We begin by providing brief information on these timers.
Timer 0 and Timer 1
Timer 0 and Timer 1 have much in common and we will consider them together.
To see how these timers operate, we need, first, to introduce the TCON SFR
(Table 11.1).
The various bits have the following functions:
TF1 Timer 1 overflow flag
Set by hardware on Timer 1 overflow.(Cleared by hardware if processor vectors to interrupt routine.)SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 194
TABLE 11.1 The TCON Special Function Register
Bit 7 (msb) 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 (Isb)
Name TF1 TR1 TF0 TR0 1E1 IT1 1E0 IT0
[Note: that the grey areas are not connected with these timers.]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 220 ---
TR1 Timer 1 run control bit
Set/ cleared by software to turn Timer 1 either ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’.
TF0 Timer 0 overflow flag
Set by hardware on Timer 0 overflow.(Cleared by hardware if processor vectors to interrupt routine.)
TR0 Timer 0 run control bit
Set / cleared by software to turn Timer 0 either ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’.
We also need to introduce the TMOD SFR (Table 11.2).
The first thing to note in TMOD is that there are three main modes of operation
(for each timer), set using the M1 and M0 bits. We will only be concerned in thisbook with Mode 1 and Mode 2, which operate in the same way for both Timer 0 andTimer 1, as follows:
Mode 1 (M1 = 0; M0 = 1)
16-bit timer/counter (with manual reload).
1
Mode 2 (M1 = 1; M0 = 0)8-bit timer/counter (with 8-bit auto-reload).
1
The remaining bits in TMOD have the following purpose:
GATE Gating control
When set, timer/counter ‘x’ is enabled only while ‘INT x’ pin is high and ‘TRx’ con-trol bit is set. When cleared timer ‘x’ is enabled whenever ‘TRx’ control bit is set.HARDWARE DELAY 195
TABLE 11.2 The TMOD Special Function Register
Bit 7 (msb) 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 (Isb)
Name Gate C/T–M1 M0 Gate C/T–M1 M0
Timer 1 Timer 0Note that the overflow of the timers can be used to generate an interrupt. We will not
make use of this facility in the Hardware Delay code, but will do so in various schedulerpatterns (see Part C and Part F for details).
To disable the generation of interrupts, we can use the C statements:
ET0 = 0: // No interupts (Timer 0)
ET1 = 0; // No interupts (Timer 1)
1. See Chapter 13 for a discussion of the difference between ‘auto’ and ‘manual’ timer reloadswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 221 ---
C/T–Counter or timer select bit
Set for counter operation (inputfrom ‘Tx’ input pin). 
Cleared for timer operation (input from internal system clock).
Finally, before we can see how this hardware can be used to create delays, you need
to be aware that there are an additional two registers associated with each timer: theseare known as TL0 and TH0, and TL1 and TH1. These ‘L’ and ‘H’ refer to ‘low’ and‘high’ bytes, as will become clear shortly.
Creating delays with Timer 0 and Timer 1
To see how this all fits together, we will consider a concrete example (Listing 11.1).
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer
TMOD &= 0xF0;  // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01;  // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)
ET0 = 0;  // No interruptsTH0 = 0; // Timer 0 initial value (High Byte)
TL0 = 0; // Timer 0 initial value (Low Byte)
TF0 = 0; // Clear overflow flag
TR0 = 1; // Start Timer 0
while (TF0 == 0): // Loop until Timer 0 overflows (TF0 == 1)TR0 = 0; // Stop Timer 0
Listing 11.1 Creating a simple hardware delay using Timer 0
In Listing 11.1, these lines set up Timer 0, in Mode 1 (16-bit timer), without gating:
TMOD &= 0xF0;  // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)
TMOD |= 0x01;  // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)
We disable interrupt generation, as discussed earlier:
ET0 = 0;  // No interupts
We then load the timer registers with the initial timer value (we consider this
further in the remainder of this pattern):
TH0 = 0;  // Timer 0 initial value (High Byte)
TL0 = 0;  // Timer 0 initial value (Low Byte)
Then we are ready to clear the timer flag, and start the timer running:
TF0 = 0;  // Clear overflow flagTR0 = 1;  // Start timer 0
What happens now in the original 8051 (we consider some exceptions under
‘Portability’) is that the timer will be incremented every 12 oscillator cycles. WhenSOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 196www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 222 ---
this (16-bit) timer overflows – that is, it is incremented from a value of 65535 – the
timer flag (TF1) will be set. In addition, as we have already noted, this overflow canbe used to generate an interrupt; we do not use this option here.
This is very useful behaviour. Simply by varying the initial value stored in the
timer, we specify the number of oscillations that occur before an overflow takes placeand can generate shorter delays.
Building on the material discussed under ‘Background’, 
HARDWARE DELAY calcula-
tions generally take the following form:
GWe calculate the required starting value for the timer.
GWe load this value into Timer 0 or Timer 1.
GWe start the timer.
GThe timer will be incremented, without software intervention, at a rate determinedby the oscillator frequency; we wait for the timer to reach its maximum value and‘roll over’.
GThe rolling over of the timer signals the end of the delay by changing the value ofa flag variable.
GWith a 12-oscillator per instruction 8051, running at 12 MHz, the longest delaythat can be produced with a 16-bit timer is ~65 ms. If we need longer delays, wecan repeat the process.
Overall, this is a powerful and reliable technique and can be used to generate
repeatable delays with good levels of accuracy. A detailed code example is presentedlater in this pattern.
Why not use Timer 2?
In many cases, as we saw in Chapter 3, modern 8051 family devices are based on theslightly later 8052 architecture: such devices include an extra, more powerful timer(called, logically, Timer 2).
While Timer 2 can be used to generate delays (in a manner nearly identical to that
used with Timer 0 and Timer 1 in this pattern), this is generally an inappropriate usefor this resource. This is because Timer 2 is a 16-bit auto-reload timer. This auto-reload
feature has no value in the generation of delays, but makes it ideally suited as a sourceof ‘ticks’ for the schedulers we use throughout most of this book.
2
Hardware resource implications
HARDWARE DELAY requires non-exclusive use of a timer. There are often competing
demands for such resources, since they are essential for driving a scheduler and areoften used, for example, to generate timeouts (see 
HARDWARE TIMEOUT [page 305]),
for pulse-width modulation (see 3-LEVEL PWM [page 822]), for pulse-rate modulationHARDWARE DELAY 197
2. See Chapter 13 and CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] for further information on this topic.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 223 ---
(see HARDWARE PRM [page 742]) and for pulse counting (see HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT
[page 728].
Reliability and safety implications
The techniques discussed in HARDWARE DELAY are generally more portable and more
accurate than software-based delays, but they are still not suitable for generating pre-cisely timed delays without careful hand-tuning to take into account factors such asthe time taken to call the delay function and the time taken to load the timer withthe initial count value.
Delays generated through multiple calls to a delay function will increase the
impact of these factors; long delays generated using this technique are likely to beparticularly inaccurate.
Portability
We consider two main portability issues here.
Differences in timer increment rates
In the original 8051 (and in most current 8051s), Timer 0 and Timer 1 are incre-mented every 12 oscillator cycles: that is, at 1 MHz in a device using a 12 MHz crystaloscillator. In more recent 8051 devices, factors of 6, 4 or 1 are also used. You mustcheck the data sheet to ensure that your calculations of the initial reload values takethese differences into account.
Note that the library code (listed later) is itself highly portable, because it makes
use of information provided in the 
PROJECT HEADER [page 169] file.
Porting within the 8051 family
There are limited timers available in the 8051 family. Careful use of particular timerscan help make your code easier to port.
For example, in many applications presented in this book, we will use Timer 2 (where
available) to drive a scheduler (see, for example, Chapter 13). In addition, in some appli-cations, Timer 1 will be required to generate baud rates, for a serial network. As a result,your delay code will be particularly portable if you base it on Timer 0.
Note that, where you will use a scheduler and a serial link and your chosen micro-
controller does not have Timer 2 available, you may need to use both the availabletimers for the scheduler (T0) and baud rate generation (T1). You will then be forced touse an implementation of 
SOFTWARE DELAY [page 179] for any necessary delay gener-
ation. Note also that, in many cases, the use of a scheduler can remove the need formost delay calculations.
Finally, note that, in addition to Timer 2, some extended 8051s have an additional
internal timer, intended for use as an internal baud rate generator: this can free Timer1 for other purposes, such as delay generation. (See Chapter 3 for details.)SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 198www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 224 ---
Porting beyond the 8051 family
Like the 8051 family, most microcontrollers have on-board timers: where such timers
are available, this pattern may be adapted without great difficulty. If your chosenmicrocontroller does not have an on-board timer, the pattern 
SOFTWARE DELAY [page
206] offers an alternative solution.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
These basic time delay techniques have the great advantage that they arevery simple and can be implemented in a few lines of code. As a result, theyare widely applicable and are frequently used in applications where veryaccurate timing is not of great concern.
They are not suitable for generating very short delays; see ‘Related patterns and
alternative solutions’ for alternative suggestions.
Because of the need to manually reload the initial timer value, the delays
obtained may not be precisely as expected. This is of particular concern where, forexample, an attempt is made to delay for (say) a second by invoking a 50 msdelay 20 times: this will notbe accurate. Do not attempt to use 
HARDWARE DELAY
to implement a real-time clock!
They require access to an important hardware resource (a timer).The timings are not very portable: even different members of the 8051 family
have different relationships between crystal frequency and instruction cycle fre-quency (note, however, that the code that follows addresses this problem for awide range of delays).
As implemented here, the processor is tied up waiting for the timer to overflow.
Where processor power is limited, this may not be an acceptable solution: use ofa scheduler (see Chapter 13) can often reduce the need to waste CPU time inthis way.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The code we present in this pattern is designed to generate delays on N millisecondduration, which is a key requirement in many applications. If this is not what yourequire, then some alternatives are as follows:
GTo generate delays from ~10 µs to about ~10+ ms, HARDWARE TIMEOUT [page 305]
can be used very effectively.
GFor generating delays less than ~10 µs, neither HARDWARE DELAY nor HARDWARE
TIMEOUT – both of which use Timer 0 / Timer 1 – is suitable. For example, in an
original 12 MHz 8051, the minimum timer increment is, in theory, 1 µs: that is theoscillator frequency / 12. However, this delay will often be less than the time takento call the delay function, set up and start the timer. In general, delays less thanHARDWARE DELAY 199www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 225 ---
around 10 µs are better implemented in software: see SOFTWARE DELAY [page 206]
(and LOOP TIMEOUT [page 298]).
GDelays waste CPU time and it is better to avoid using them at all, if possible: see
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] for a delay-free alternative that will work in
many circumstances.
Example: Generic delay code
Flashing an LED can be useful as a means of drawing attention to a particular warningmessage or error condition. It can also be used as a means of saving power. There are,of course, numerous different ways of implementing such behaviour: here, we illus-trate the use of the 
HARDWARE DELAY pattern.
Hardware
The single LED (or a similar device, such as a buzzer) is assumed to be connected to an8051 microcontroller on Port 1 (P1.2), using positive logic: that is, +5V lights the LED(Figure 11.1).
Software
Here we use some generic delay code. This allows the initial timer values to be ‘auto-matically’ determined for a wide range of different hardware and oscillatorcombinations, by means of the project header file ( Main.H ), and some appropriate
use of the C pre-processor directives.
The key files required in the project follow (Listings 11.2 to 11.4). As usual com-
plete set of files are included on the CD.SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 200
FIGURE  11.1 The LED hardware 
[Note: See IC BUFFER [page 118] for further details.]5V
8051 deviceP1.2
Logic 1
(5V) tolight LED15mA
LED200Ω
74HC04www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 226 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.H (v1.00)
-----------------------------------------------------------------
'Project Header '(see Chap 9) for project DELAY_H (see Chap 11)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#ifndef _MAIN_H
#define _MAIN_H
//-----------------------------------------------------------------
// WILL NEED TO EDIT THIS SECTION FOR EVERY PROJECT//-----------------------------------------------------------------
// Must include the appropriate microcontroller header file here
#include <reg52.h>
// Include oscillator / chip details here 
// (essential if generic delays / timeouts are used)// -// Oscillator / resonator frequency (in Hz) e.g. (11059200UL) #define OSC_FREQ (120000000UL)
// Number of oscillations per instruction (4, 6 or 12) 
// 12 - Original 8051 / 8052 and numerous modern versions //  6 - Various Infineon and Philips devices, etc.//  4 - Dallas, etc.//// Take care with Dallas devices // - Timers default to *12* osc ticks unless CKCON is modified // - If using generic code on a Dallas device, use 12 here #define OSC_PER_INST (12)
//------------------------------------------------------------------
// SHOULD NOT NEED TO EDIT THE SECTIONS BELOW//------------------------------------------------------------------typedef unsigned char tByte; typedef unsigned int  tWord; typedef unsigned long tLong:
// Misc #defines
#ifndef TRUE#define FALSE 0#define TRUE (!FALSE)#endifHARDWARE DELAY 201www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 227 ---
#define RETURN_NORMAL (bit) 0
#define RETURN_ERROR (bit) 1
//------------------------------------------------------------------
// Interrupts // - see Chapter 13.//------------------------------------------------------------------
// Generic 8051 timer interrupts (used in most schedulers) 
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow 1#define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Additional interrupts (used in shared-clock schedulers) 
#define INTERRUPT_UART_Rx_Tx 4 #define INTERRUPT_CAN_c515c 17 
//------------------------------------------------------------------
// Error codes // - see Chapter 14.//------------------------------------------------------------------
#define ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS (1)
#define ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK (2)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK (3)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER (3)
#define ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START (4)
#define ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE (5)
#define ERROR_SCH_CAN_BUS_ERROR (6)
#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64 (11)
#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64 (12)#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE (13)#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE (14)
#define ERROR_USART_TI (21)
#define ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR (22)
#endif
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
--- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.2 Part of the generic delay code (Hardware Delay) exampleSOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 202www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 228 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for hardware delay library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Main.h"
#include "Delay.h"
#include "LED_Flas.h "
void main(void) 
{LED_Flash_Init();
while (1)
{LED_Flash_Update(); Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);}
}
/*--------------------------------- --------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.3 Part of the generic delay code (Hardware Delay) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Delay_T0.C (vl.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple hardware delays based on T0.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Main.H"
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Timer preload values for use in simple (hardware) delays 
// - Timers are 16-bit, manual reload (
'one shot').
// NOTE: These values are portable but timings are *approximate*
// and *must* be checked by hand if accurate timing is required.//HARDWARE DELAY 203www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 229 ---
// Define Timer 0 / Timer 1 reload values for ~1 msec delay
// NOTE: Adjustment made to allow for function call overheard etc.#define PRELOAD01 (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 1063)))#define PRELOAD01H (PRELOAD01 / 256)#define PRELOADO1L (PRELOAD01 % 256)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Hardware_Delay_T0()Function to generate N millisecond delay (approx).Uses Timer 0 (easily adapted to Timer 1).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Hardware_Delay_T0(const tWord N)
{tWord  ms;
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer
TMOD &= 0xF0:  // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x0l;  // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)
ETO = 0;  // No interupts// Delay value is *approximately* 1 ms per loop 
for (ms 0; ms < N; ms++)
{TH0 = PRELOAD01H; TL0 = PRELOAD01L;
TF0 = 0; // clear overflow flag
TR0 = 1; // start timer 0
while (TF0 == 0); // Loop until Timer 0 overflows (TF0 == 1)
TR0 = 0; // Stop Timer 0
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------------ END OF FILE ----------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.4 Part of the generic delay code (Hardware Delay) example
The output from this project is shown running in the Keil hardware simulator in
Figure 11.2. Note that the delay value obtained is within 0.001% of the requiredvalue.SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 204www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 230 ---
Further reading
—HARDWARE DELAY 205
FIGURE  11.2 Output from the Hardware Delay example running in the Keil hardware simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 231 ---
SOFTWARE DELAY
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
How do you create a simple delay without using any hardware (timer) resources?
Background
See HARDWARE DELAY [page 194] for background information.
Solution
Suppose we want to flash the LEDs connected to Port 1 on an 8051 microcontrollerwith a two second cycle time (so that they are on for 1 second then off for 1 second,ad infinitum ). The basic program structure we require could be based on a 
SUPER LOOP
[page 162] as follows:
...
while (1)
{P1 = 0xFF; // Delay one second P1 = 0x00;// Delay one second}
If we wish to implement these delays and have no available timers (see HARDWARE
DELAY [page 194]), we could use a ‘Software Delay’, implemented as follows:
Loop_Delay()
{unsigned int x; 
for (x=0; x <= 65535; x++);
}
We could then measure the pulse frequency we obtained, using an oscilloscope or
a software simulator. If we found that these delays were not long enough, we couldeasily extend them by adding additional layers, as shown in Longer_Loop_Delay()SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 206www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 232 ---
Longer_Loop_Delay()
{unsigned int x; unsigned int y; 
for (x=0; x<=65535; x++)
{for (y=0; y<=65535; y++);}
}
Hardware resource implications
Unlike HARDWARE DELAY [page 194], SOFTWARE DELAY uses no timer resources. Note,
however, that the CPU time spent in the delay calculation is wasted: using a sched-uler (see Chapter 13) can, in many circumstances, avoid the waste of CPU time.
Reliability and safety implications
Software delays are not suitable for use in applications where precise timing is required.
Portability
Software delays can be used even on a microcontroller / microprocessor without abuilt-in timer. However, the precise delay duration obtained varies (enormously) withdifferences in hardware and software.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SOFTWARE DELAY can be used to produce very short delays.
SOFTWARE DELAY requires no hardware timers.
SOFTWARE DELAY will work on any microcontroller.
It is very difficult to produce precisely timed delays.The loops must be returned if you decide to use a different processor, change the
clock frequency or even change the compiler optimization settings.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In most circumstances, it is better to avoid using delays at all: see CO-OPERATIVE SCHED -
ULER [page 255] for a delay-free alternative that will work in many circumstances.
If you do require delays then HARDWARE DELAY [page 194] is often a better
alternative.SOFTWARE DELAY 207www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 233 ---
Example: Creating a 5 µs delay in an I2C library
As we discuss in Chapter 23, software implementation of the I2C serial protocol can
require small delays. In Listing 11.5 we illustrate how a delay of around 5 µs can be
created in software for use in such a library.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
_I2C_Delay()A short software delay.Adjust this for a minimum of 5.425 µs to work with 
'standard'I2C devices. Any delay longer than this will also work. 
With modern devices shorter delays may also be used.
NOTE: Cannot do this with a Hardware Delay!!!
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void _I2C_Delay(void)
{int x;x++; x++;}
Listing 11.5 Creating a very short delay
Example: Flashing an LED
We will repeat the ‘flashing LED’ example used in HARDWARE DELAY [Page 194] to
illustrate the SOFTWARE DELAY pattern.
To control the flashing of the LED, we will use an endless loop involving one SOFT -
WARE DELAY and a ‘flash LED’ function.
We assume that we are using a Standard 8051 device with 12 oscillations per
instruction cycle and an oscillator frequency of 12 MHz. (see Chapter 4 for furtherdetails.)
The key files required in the project follow (Listings 11.6 to 11.11). As usual
complete set of files are included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for SOFTWARE DELAY pattern.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 208www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 234 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "Loop_Del.h "
#include "LED_Flas.h "
void main(void)
{LED_Flash_Init(); 
while (1)
{LED_Flash_Update(); Loop_delay(1000);}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.6 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Loop_Del.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See Loop_Del.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Loop_delay(const unsigned int);/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---------- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.7 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Loop_Del.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Implementation of the pattern SOFTWARE DELAY.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Loop_Delay(const unsigned int);SOFTWARE DELAY 209www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 235 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Loop_Delay() Delay duration varies with parameter.Parameter is, *ROUGHLY*, the delay, in milliseconds, 
on 12MHz 8051 (12 osc cycles).
You need to adjust the timing for your application!-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Loop_Delay(const unsigned int DELAY)
{unsigned int x, y:
for (x = 0; x <= DELAY; x++) 
{for (y = 0; y <= 120; y++);}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------- END OF FILE ---------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.8 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See LED_flas.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
//------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------void LED_Flash_Init(void); 
void LED_Flash_Update(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---------- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.9 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) exampleSOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 210www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 236 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple ‘Flash LED’ test function.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "LED_flas.h "
// ------ Port pins -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor 
// [see Chapter 7 for details] sbit LED_Pin = P1^2;
// ------ Public variable definitions -----------------------------static bit LED_state_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz 
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must schedule at 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Update(void)
{// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa) if (LED_state_G == 1)
{SOFTWARE DELAY 211www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 237 ---
LED_state_G 0; 
LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1; LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
----------- END OF FILE -----------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.10 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
‘Project Header’ (see Chap 9) for project S_Delay
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#ifndef _MAIN_H#define _MAIN_H
//------------------------------------------------------------------
// WILL NEED TO EDIT THIS SECTION FOR EVERY PROJECT//------------------------------------------------------------------
// Must include the appropriate microcontroller header file here
#include <reg52.h>
// Include oscillator / chip details here
// (essential if generic delays / timeouts are used)// -// Oscillator / resonator frequency (in Hz) e.g. (11059200UL) #define OSC_FREQ (12000000UL)
// Number of oscillations per instruction (e.g. 1, 4, 6 or 12) 
// 12 - Original 8051 / 8052 and numerous modern versions //  6 - Various Infineon and Philips devices, etc. //  4 - Dallas, etc.//// Take care with Dallas devicesSOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 212www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 238 ---
// - Timers default to *12* osc ticks unless CKCON is modified
// - If using generic code on a Dallas device, use 12 here#define OSC_PER_INST (12)
//------------------------------------------------------------------
// SHOULD NOT NEED TO EDIT THE SECTIONS BELOW//------------------------------------------------------------------typedef unsigned char tByte; typedef unsigned int  tWord; typedef unsigned long tLong;
// Misc #defines
#ifndef TRUE#define FALSE 0#define TRUE (!FALSE)#endif
#define RETURN_NORMAL (bit) 0
#define RETURN_ERROR (bit) 1
//--------------------------------------------------------------------
// Interrupts // - see Chapter 12.//--------------------------------------------------------------------
// Generic 8051 timer interrupts (used in most schedulers) 
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow 1 #define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3 #define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Additional interrupts (used in shared-clock schedulers)
#define INTERRUPT_UART_Rx_Tx 4 #define INTERRUPT_CAN_c515c 17
//--------------------------------------------------------------------
// Error codes// - see Chapter 13.//--------------------------------------------------------------------
#define ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS (1)
#define ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK (2)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK (3)
#define ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER (3)
#define ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START (4)
#define ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE (5)SOFTWARE DELAY 213www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 239 ---
#define ERROR_SCH_CAN_BUS_ERROR (6)
#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64 (11)
#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64 (12)#define ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE (13)#define ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE (14)
#define ERROR_USART_TI (21)
#define ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR (22)
#endif
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*--------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 11.11 Part of the Software Delay (flashing LED) example
Figure 11.3 shows this application running in the Keil hardware simulator. As can
be seen from the screen shot, the delays are approximately 1 second with theseparameters and compiler settings.
Further reading
—SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 214
FIGURE  11.3 Output from the Software Delay (flashing LED) example running on the Keil hardware
simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 240 ---
Watchdogs
Introduction
Suppose there is a hungry dog guarding a house (Figure 12.1), and someone wishes
to break in. If the burglar’s accomplice repeatedly throws the guard dog small piecesof meat at 2-minute intervals, then the dog will be so busy concentrating on thefood that he will ignore his guard duties and will not bark. However, if the accom-plice run out of meat or forgets to feed the dog for some other reason, the animalwill start barking, thereby alerting the neighbours, property occupants or police.chapter 12
FIGURE  12.1 The origins of the ‘watchdog’ analogywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 241 ---
This same basic approach is followed in computerized ‘watchdog timers’. Very
simply, these are timers which, if not refreshed at regular intervals, will overflow. Inmost cases, overflow of the timer will reset the system. Such watchdogs are intendedto deal with the fact that, even with meticulous planning and careful design, embed-ded systems can ‘hang’ due to unexpected problems. The use of a watchdog can beused to recover from this situation, in certain circumstances.
The pattern 
HARDWARE WATCHDOG [page 217] considers how to apply these tech-
niques to good effect in your embedded application.SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 216www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 242 ---
HARDWARE WATCHDOG
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GYou are designing an appropriate software foundation for your application.
Problem
How can you ensure that – if your application ‘hangs’ due to an unexpected softwareor hardware error – the system will automatically reset itself?
Background
See the introduction to this chapter for an explanation of the watchdog analogy.
Solution
Working with HARDWARE WATCHDOG means using either an internal or external (hard-
ware) timer.
We have seen in many previous cases that, where available, the use of on-chip
components is to be preferred to the use of equivalent off-chip components.Specifically, on-chip components generally offer the following benefits:
GReduced hardware complexity, which tends to result in increased system reliability.
GReduced application cost.
GReduced application size.
In the case of watchdog timers, the situation is more complex, because external
watchdog chips typically provide some useful facilities that are not available in moston-chip versions.
For example, the popular ‘1232’ watchdogs (available, in various versions, from
Dallas Semiconductors, Maxim, Linear Technology and Analog Devices) are low-cost,low-power devices. In addition to functioning as a watchdog timer, they also providepower system monitoring capabilities (see 
ROBUST RESET [page 77] for details of this).
If, as in many designs, you intend to use an external ‘robust reset’ circuit anyway,then the 1232 chips allow you to incorporate an external watchdog facility for mini-mal addition cost and only a very minor increase in hardware complexity.
Another beneficial feature of external watchdogs is that they are inherently
portable: you can generally use the same external watchdog with any member of the8051 family. By contrast, code written to work with an internal watchdog will gener-ally have to be rewritten for use with a different hardware.HARDWARE WATCHDOG 217www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 243 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 218
One situation in which on-chip watchdogs (such as those in the Infineon c515x
devices) can be beneficial is where they allow you to determine whether the systemhas undergone a normal reset or a reset caused by a watchdog overflow. This mayallow you to modify the system behaviour to match these circumstances. Withoutthis information (which is not generally available through external watchdogs with-out some complex coding) your system may be continually reset by the watchdogtimer overflow.
We can summarize by saying that, if you require watchdog facilities, you need to
consider both internal and external solutions carefully. There is no single ‘ideal’ solu-tion and – considering the issues mentioned earlier – you need to find the best matchto your requirements.
Reliability and safety implications
Before using either an internal or external watchdog, you need to be sure that the useof such a timer will increase (rather than decrease) the reliability of your application.
The first thing to bear in mind is that watchdog behaviour should be for disaster
recovery . In a well-designed system the occurrence of a watchdog reset should be a
noteworthy event that occurs rarely. If you think of the use of watchdogs in terms of‘if all else falls, then we will have to let the watchdog reset the system’, then you aretaking a realistic view of the capabilities of this approach.
Used without due care at the design phase and/or adequate testing, watchdogs can
reduce the system reliability dramatically. A particular problem with a badly designedwatchdog can occur in the presence of sustained hardware faults. In these circum-stances, a badly implemented watchdog can mean that your system constantly resetsitself. This can be extremely dangerous.
You also need to appreciate that watchdogs are unsuitable for many applications,
because the time taken to react to an error is too long. Suppose, for example, the brakingsystem in an automotive application uses a 500 ms watchdog and the vehicle encountersa problem when it is travelling at 70 miles per hour (110 km per hour). In these circum-stances, the vehicle and its passengers will have travelled some 16 yards / 15 metres –right into the car in front – before the vehicle even begins to reset the braking system. Inshort, where fast recovery is required, watchdogs are rarely the best solution.
Portability
As already noted, internal watchdogs are based on hardware that is not part of the8051/52 core. As a result, different forms of watchdog now exist on the various differ-ent 8051 derivatives and code written for one on-chip watchdog will generally needto be adapted for use with a different device. By contrast, software written for externalwatchdogs can be more portable.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 244 ---
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 219
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Watchdogs can provide a ‘last resort’ form of error recovery. If you think of
the use of watchdogs in terms of ‘if all else fails, then reset the system’, thenyou are taking a realistic view of the capabilities of this approach.
In the presence of intermittent faults, e.g. rare bursts of EMI, watchdogs can
be very effective.
Watchdogs with long timeout periods are unsuitable for many applications.Used without due care at the design phase and / or adequate testing, watchdogs
can reduce the system reliability dramatically.
In the presence of sustained hardware faults, badly implemented watchdogs can
mean that your system constantly resets itself. This can be very dangerous.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In certain restricted circumstances, a software watchdog may also be useful.
This can be created from two components:
GA timer ISR
GA refresh function
Essentially, we set a timer to overflow in (say) 60 ms. Under normal circumstances,
this timer will never overflow, because we will call the refresh function regularly andthereby restart the timer. If, however, the program is ‘jammed’, the refresh functionwill not be called. When the timer overflows, the ISR will be called: this will imple-ment an ‘appropriate’ error recovery strategy.
We have used software watchdogs in several applications. The main problem with
this approach is that some software errors (for example, those induced by EMI) candisrupt the watchdog timer as well as the main application code: this rarely happenswith hardware watchdogs, which tend to be more robust.
The main advantage with software watchdogs is that different forms of error recov-
ery (not just a complete chip reset) are possible. However, use of an on-chip hardwarewatchdog can provide flexible reset behaviour and is, in many circumstances, a morereliable solution.
Example: Using the ‘1232’ external watchdog timer
In this example we assume that we will be developing a simple central-heating con-trol system and will be using an external ‘1232’ watchdog chip to improve thereliability of the application.
The use of the 1232 is very straightforward:
GWe wire up the watchdog to the microcontroller reset pin, as illustrated in Figure 12.2.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 245 ---
GWe choose from one of three (nominal) possible timeout periods, and connect the
TD pin on the 1232 to select an appropriate period (see Table 12.1).
GWe pulse the ST line on the 1232 regularly, with a pulse interval less than the time-out period.SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 220
FIGURE  12.2 Simple demonstration circuit for 1232 watchdogRST
XTL1
XTL2
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7
P1.6P1.5
P1.4)
P1.3P1.2
P1.1 (T2EX)
P1.0(T2)
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8052
VSS32
33343536373839
8
7654321
28
272625242322219
19
18
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
VccCxtalCxtal/PBRST
TDTOLGND/STO
RSTVcc Vcc(+5V)
8
5
TABLE 12.1 Timings for the ubiquitous ‘1232’ watchdog
Minimum timeout Typical timeout Maximum timeout
TD to GND 62.5 ms 150 ms 250 ms
TD floating 250    ms 600 ms 1000 ms
TD to Vcc 500    ms 1200 ms 2000 mswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 246 ---
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 221
A code example, using the hardware in Figure 12.2 (with a 150 ms timeout), is
given in Listings 12.1 to 12.2.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Framework for a central heating system using 'Super Loop '.
*** Assumes external '1232'watchdog timer on P1^0 ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Cen_Heat.h "
#include "Dog_1232.h "
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Init the system C_HEAT_Init();
// Watchdog automatically startswhile(1)
{// Find out what temperature the user requires // (via the user interface)C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature();
// Find out what the current room temperature is 
// (via temperature sensor) C_HEAT_Get_Actual_Temperature();
// Adjust the gas burner, as required 
C_HEAT_Control_Boiler();
// Feed the watchdog 
WATCHDOG_Feed();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
-------- END OF FILE --------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.1 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware 
Watchdogwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 247 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 222
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Dog_1232.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Watchdog timer library for external 1232 WD.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Dog_1232.h"#include "Main.h"// ------ Port pins -----------------------------------------------// Connect 1232 (pin /ST) to the WATCHDOG_pin 
sbit WATCHDOG_pin = P1^0;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
WATCHDOG_Feed()'Feed' the external 1232-type watchdog chip.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void WATCHDOG_Feed(void)
{static bit WATCHDOG_state;
// Change the state of the watchdog pin 
if (WATCHDOG_state == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state = 0: WATCHDOG_pin = 0; }
else
{WATCHDOG_state = 1; WATCHDOG_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------- END OF FILE ---------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.2 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
Watchdogwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 248 ---
Example: Using the internal watchdog timer on the 
Atmel 89S53
The Atmel 89S53 is an example of a Standard 8051 microcontroller with a good
on-chip watchdog timer.
A key feature of this timer is that it operates from an independent oscillator: as a
result, it allows the system to respond to (intermittent) failures of the main crystaloscillator or resonator.
The key register used to control the watchdog timer is the WCON register, shown
in Table 12.2.
The role of the individual bits in WCON is explained in Table 12.3.
The prescaler bits, PS0, PS1 and PS2 in SFR WCON are used to set the period of the
Watchdog Timer from 16 ms to 2048 ms. The available timer periods are shown inTable 12.4 and the actual timer periods (at Vcc = 5V) are within ±30% of the nominal.
The WDT is disabled by power-on reset and during power-down. It is enabled by
setting the WDTEN bit in SFR WCON (address = 96H). The WDT is reset by settingthe WDTRST bit in WCON. When the WDT times out without being reset or disabled,an internal RST pulse is generated to reset the CPU.
Listings 12.3 to 12.7 how we might use this watchdog in the simple central-heating
system discussed in the previous example.HARDWARE WATCHDOG 223
TABLE 12.2 The WCON SFR used to control the on-chip watchdog timer in the Atmel
AT89S53
Bit 76 5 4 3 2 1 0
Name PS2 PS1 PS0 NOT WD NOT WD NOT WD WDTRST WDTEN
TABLE 12.3 A more detailed look at the WCON SFR in the Atmel AT89S53
Symbol Function
PS2 Prescaler Bits for the Watchdog Timer. When all three bits are set to ‘0’, the 
PS1 watchdog timer has a nominal period of 16 ms. When all three bits are set to PS0 ‘1’, the nominal period is 2048 ms. See Table 12.4 for more detailed information.
Note: Actual timings can vary by as much as ±30% of the nominal values.
WDTRST Watchdog Timer Reset. Each time this bit is set to ‘1’ by user software, a pulse is
generated to reset the watchdog timer. The WDTRST bit is then automatically 
reset to ‘0’ in the next instruction cycle. The WDTRST bit is Write-Only.
WDTEN Watchdog Timer Enable Bit. WDTEN = 1 enables the watchdog timer and
WDTEN = 0 disables the watchdog timer.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 249 ---
SOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 224
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Central heating demo using 'Super Loop 'and 'Hardware Watchdog '.
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Cen_Heat.h "
#include "Dog_AT.h"
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Init the system C_HEAT_Init();
// Start the watchdog 
WATCHDOG_Init();
while(1) // 
'for ever'(Super Loop)
{// Find out what temperature the user requires // (via the user interface) C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature();TABLE 12.4 Watchdog timer period selection in the AT89S53
PS2 PS1 PS0 Period
(nominal)
0 0 0 16 ms
0 0 1 32 ms
0 1 0 64 ms
0 1 1 128 ms
1 0 0 256 ms
1 0 1 512 ms
1 1 0 1024 ms
1 1 1 2048 mswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 250 ---
// Find out what the current room temperature is 
// (via temperature sensor) C_HEAT_Get_Actual_Temperature();
// Adjust the gas burner, as required 
C_HEAT_Control_Boiler();
// Feed the watchdog 
WATCHDOG_Feed();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
----- END OF FILE -----------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.3 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
Watchdog
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Dog_AT.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see Dog_AT.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include <At89S53.h>// Function prototypes 
void WATCHDOG_Init(void);  // Start the watchdog// We use a macro to feed the watchdog (for speed) #define WATCHDOG_Feed() WMCON |= 0x02
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------- END OF FILE ---------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.4 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
Watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Dog_AT.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------HARDWARE WATCHDOG 225www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 251 ---
Demonstration of watchdog timer facilities on Atmel 89S53.
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include 
"Dog_AT.h"
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void WATCHDOG_Init(void)
{// Set 512 ms watchdog// PS2 = 1; PS1 = 0; PS0 = 1// Set WDTRST = 1// Set WDTEN  = 1 - start the Watchdog//// WMCON |= 10100011 WMCON |= 0xA3;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------ END OF FILE ----------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.5 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
Watchdog
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cen_Heat.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see Cen_Heat.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// Function prototypes 
void C_HEAT Init(void): void C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature(void); void C_HEAT_Get_Actual_temperature(void); void C_HEAT_Control_Boiler(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
--------- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.6 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
WatchdogSOFTWARE FOUNDATIONS 226www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 252 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cen_Heat.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Framework for a central heating system using 'Super Loop '.
[Compiles and runs but does nothing useful]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*//*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void_C_HEAT Init(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void C_HEAT_Get_Required_Temperature(void)
{//User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void C_HEAT_Get_Actual_temperature(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void C_HEAT_Control_Boiler(void)
{// User code here ...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
------- END OF FILE ---------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 12.7 Part of a central-heating demo using Super Loop and Hardware
Watchdog
Further reading
—HARDWARE WATCHDOG 227www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 253 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 254 ---
Time-triggered 
architectures for single-processor systems
This book is primarily concerned with the creation of time-triggered embedded systems.
Having laid the foundations, we are now in a position to consider in detail the ways inwhich time-triggered software architectures may be created, in ‘C’, for the 8051 family.
In Chapter 13, we introduce schedulers and explain how they may be used to create effi-
cient time-triggered applications.
In Chapter 14, we describe, in detail, the construction of 
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
[page 255]. This simple but flexible environment is suitable for use with a very wide rangeof embedded applications. 
Using a co-operative scheduler in your application has a number of benefits, one of
which being that the development process is simiplified. However, to get the maximumbenefit from the scheduler you need to approach the design in a slightly different (‘taskoriented’) way. We discuss how to do this in Chapter 15 and Chapter 16.
Finally, in Chapter 17, we present 
HYBRID SCHEDULER [page 333]. Like all of the sched-
uler patterns in this book, HYBRID SCHEDULER is based on a co-operative scheduler;
however, this version is also able to support a single pre-emptive task.part cwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 255 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 256 ---
An introduction to schedulers
In this chapter, we see that schedulers can play a similar role in embedded systems to that
played by ‘Windows’ (or other operating systems) in many modern desktop applications.
13.1 Introduction
Having laid the foundations in Parts A and B, we are now in a position to look in
detail at the ways in which time-triggered applications may be created with the 8051family of microcontrollers. 
To produce such applications, we will use a scheduler: this is a very simple operating
environment for embedded applications. In this introductory chapter, we explain whata scheduler is and the differences between co-operative and pre-emptive scheduling.We will also explain why the use of a co-operative scheduler can help to make even thesmallest of embedded applications easier to develop and more reliable in operation.
To place the discussions in the rest of the chapter in context, we begin by briefly
reviewing the reasons why desktop systems employ an operating system and explain-ing why such an OS is not appropriate for use with the type of embedded systemsconsidered in this book.
13.2 The desktop OS
As stated in the preface, it is assumed in this book that readers will have had previous
experience of software development for desktop computer systems. As we discussed inChapter 1, the desktop / workstation environment plays host to many information sys-tems, as well as general-purpose desktop applications, such as word processors. Achapter 13www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 257 ---
common characteristic of modern desktop environments is that the user interacts with
the application through a high-resolution graphics screen, plus a keyboard and amouse. Support for this complex user interface is provided by the operating system andits associated libraries.
In such an environment, the program the user requires (such as a word processor) is
usually loaded from disk on demand, along with any required data (such as a wordprocessor file). Figure 13.1 shows a typical operating environment for such a wordprocessor. Here the application is well insulated from the underlying hardware. Forexample, when the user wished to save her latest novel on disk, the word processor del-egates most of the necessary work to the operating system, which in turn may delegatemany of the hardware-specific commands to the BIOS (basic input/output system).
The desktop PC does not require an operating system (or BIOS). However, for most
users, the main advantage of a personal computer is its flexibility: that is, that the samepiece of equipment has the potential to run many thousands of different programs. Ifthe PC had no operating system, each of these programs would need to be able to carryout all the low-level functions for itself. This would be very inefficient and would tendto make applications more expensive. It would also be likely to lead to errors, as manyfunctions would have to be duplicated in even the smallest of programs.
We can get a feel for the type of problems that would result in a world without
Windows (or UNIX) if we consider ‘DOS’, an early operating system widely used on PCs.Readers old enough to have used DOS applications will remember that every program
needed to provide a suitable printer driver: if the printer was subsequently changed, thisgenerally meant that every application on the PC needed to be upgraded in order totake advantage of the new hardware. With Windows, this problem does not arise: whena new printer is purchased, a single driver is required. When this had been installed,every program on the computer can immediately make use of the new hardware.
One way of viewing this is that a desktop operating system is used to run multiple
programs, and the operating systems provides the ‘common code’ (for printing, filestorage, graphics, and so forth) that is required by this set of programs: this reduces theneed to duplicate identical program components, reducing the opportunity for errorsand making the overall system more reliable and easier to maintain.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 232
FIGURE  13.1 A schematic representation of the BIOS/OS sandwich from a desk-bound computer
system running some word processor softwareWord processor
Operating system
BIOS
Hardwarewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 258 ---
13.3 Assessing the Super Loop architecture
Many of the features of the modern desktop OS, such as graphics capability, printing
and disk access, are of little value in embedded applications, where sophisticatedgraphics screens, printers and disks are unavailable. 
As a result, as we saw in Chapter 9, the software architecture used in many simple
embedded applications is a form of 
SUPER LOOP (Listing 13.1).
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C
------------------------------------------------------------------
Architecture of a simple Super Loop application
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "X.h"/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Prepare for Task XX_Init();
while(1) // 'for ever' (Super Loop)
{X(); // Perform the task}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 13.1 Part of a simple Super Loop demonstrationAN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 233
FIGURE  13.2 A schematic representation of the role played by the operating system in a desktop
applicationWord processor
Operating system
BIOS
HardwareOS provides 'common code' for:
• Graphics• Printing• File storage• Sound• ...www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 259 ---
The main advantages of the Super Loop architecture illustrated in Listing 13.1 are (1)
that it is simple, and therefore easy to understand, and (2) that it consumes virtuallyno system memory or CPU resources.
However, we get ‘nothing for nothing’: Super Loops consume little memory or
processor resources because they provide few facilities to the developer. A particularlimitation with this architecture is that it is very difficult to execute Task X at preciseintervals of time: as we will see, this is a very significant drawback.
For example, consider a collection of requirements assembled from a range of dif-
ferent embedded projects (in no particular order):
GThe current speed of the vehicle must be measured at 0.5 second intervals.
GThe display must be refreshed 40 times every second. 
GThe calculated new throttle setting must be applied every 0.5 seconds.
GA time-frequency transform must be performed 20 times every second.
GIf the alarm sounds, it must be switched off (for legal reasons) after 20 minutes.
GIf the front door is opened, the alarm must sound in 30 seconds if the correctpassword is not entered in this time.
GThe engine vibration data must be sampled 1,000 times per second.
GThe frequency-domain data must be classified 20 times every second.
GThe keypad must be scanned every 200 ms.
GThe master (control) node must communicate with all other nodes (sensor nodesand sounder nodes) once per second.
GThe new throttle setting must be calculated every 0.5 seconds. 
GThe sensors must be sampled once per second.
We can summarize this list by saying that many embedded systems must carry
out tasks at particular instants of time. More specifically, we have two kinds of activ-ity to perform:
GPeriodic tasks , to be performed (say) once every 100 ms
GOne-shot tasks , to be performed once after a delay of (say) 50 ms
This is very difficult to achieve with the primitive architecture shown in Listing
13.1. Suppose, for example, that we need to start Task X every 200 ms, and that thetask takes 10 ms to complete. Listing 13.2 illustrates one way in which we mightadapt the code in Listing 13.1 in order to try to achieve this.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{
Init_System();while(1) // 'for ever' (Super Loop)
{X();  // Perform the task (10 ms duration)SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 234www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 260 ---
Delay_190ms();  // Delay for 190 ms
}
}
Listing 13.2 Trying to use the Super Loop architecture to execute tasks at regular 
intervals
The approach illustrated in Listing 13.2 is not generally adequate, because it will only
work if the following conditions are satisfied:
1We know the precise duration of Task X
2This duration never varies
In practical applications, determining the precise task duration is rarely straightfor-
ward. Suppose we have a very simple task that does not interact with the outsideworld but, instead, performs some internal calculations. Even under these ratherrestricted circumstances, changes to compiler optimization settings – even changes toan apparently unrelated part of the program – can alter the speed at which the taskexecutes. This can make fine-tuning the timing very tedious and error prone.
The second condition is even more problematic. Often in an embedded system the
task will be required to interact with the outside world in a complex way. In these cir-cumstances the task duration will vary according to outside activities in a mannerover which the programmer has very little control.
13.4 A better solution
A better solution to the problems outlined is to use timer-based interrupts as a meansof invoking functions at particular times.
Timer-based interrupts and interrupt service routines
As we saw in Chapter 1, an interrupt is a hardware mechanism used to notify a proces-sor that an ‘event’ has taken place: such events may be internal events or externalevents. Altogether the core 8051 / 8052 architecture supports seven interrupt sources:
GThree timer/counter interrupts (related to Timer 0, Timer 1 and – where available –Timer 2)
GTwo UART-related interrupts ( note : these share the same interrupt vector, and can
be viewed as a single interrupt source)
GTwo external interrupts
In addition, there is one addition interrupt source over which the programmer has
minimal control:
GThe ‘power-on reset’ (POR) interruptAN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 235www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 261 ---
When an interrupt is generated, the processor ‘jumps’ to an address at the bottom
of the CODE memory area. These locations must contain suitable code with whichthe microcontroller can respond to the interrupt or, more commonly, the locationswill include another ‘jump’ instruction, giving the address of suitable ‘interrupt serv-ice routine’ located elsewhere in (CODE) memory.
While the process of handling interrupts may seem rather complicated, creating
interrupt service routines (ISRs) in a high-level language is a straightforward process,as illustrated in Listing 13.3.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple timer ISR demonstration program
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include <AT89x52.h>#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5// Function prototype
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_2_Init(void);
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void main(void)
{Timer_2_Init(); // Set up Timer 2
EA = 1; // Globally enable interruptswhile(1); // An empty Super Loop
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_2_Init(void)
{// Timer 2 is configured as a 16-bit timer,// which is automatically reloaded when it overflows//// This code (generic 8051/52) assumes a 12 MHz system osc. // The Timer 2 resolution is then 1.000 µs// (see Chapter 11 for details)//// Reload value is FC18 (hex) = 64536 (decimal)
// Timer (16-bit) overflows when it reaches 65536 (decimal)// Thus, with these setting, timer will overflow every 1 msSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 236www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 262 ---
T2CON = 0x04; // Load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00; // Load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC; // Load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC; // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. high byteTL2 = 0x18; // Load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18; // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. low byte
// Timer 2 interrupt is enabled, and ISR will be called 
// whenever the timer overflows - see below.ET2 = 1;
// Start Timer 2 running
TR2 = 1;  }
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void X(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 1 ms
// Place required code here...
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 13.3 The framework of an application using a timer ISR to invoke a regular 
task
The result of running the program shown in Listing 13.3 in the Keil hardware simula-
tor is shown in Figure 13.3.AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 237
FIGURE  13.3 The result of running the program shown in Listing 13.3 in the Keil hardware simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 263 ---
Much of Listing 13.3 should be familiar. The code to set up Timer 2 in the function
Timer_2_Init() is the same as the delay code discussed in Chapter 11, the two
main differences being that, in this case:
1The timer will generate an interrupt when it overflows
2The timer will be automatically reloaded, and will immediately begin counting again
We discuss both of these differences in the following subsections.
The interrupt service routine (ISR)
The interrupt generated by the overflow of Timer 2, invokes the ISR called, here, X(). 
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void X(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 1 ms
// Place required code here...
}
The link between this function and the timer overflow is made using the Keil key-
word interrupt (included after the function header in the function definition):
void X(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
plus the following #define directive:
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
To understand where the ‘5’ comes from, note that the interrupt numbers used in
ISRs directly correspond to the enable bit index of the interrupt source in the 8051 IESFR. That is, bit 0 of the IE register will be linked to a function using ‘interrupt 0’.Table 13.1 shows the link between the interrupt sources and the required interruptnumbers for the original 8051/8052.
Overall, the use of interrupts linked to timer overflows is a safe and powerful tech-
nique which will be applied throughout this book. 
Automatic timer reloads
As noted earlier, when Timer 2 overflows, it is automatically reloaded and immedi-ately begins counting again. In this case, the timer is reloaded using the contents ofthe ‘capture’ registers (note that the names of these registers vary slightly betweenchip manufacturers):
RCAP2H  = 0xFC;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. high byte
RCAP2L  = 0x18;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. low byteSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 238www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 264 ---
This automatic reload facility ensures that the timer keeps generating the required
ticks, at precisely 1 ms intervals, without any software load, and without any inter-vention from the user’s program.
13.5 Example: Flashing an LED
The example just given is rather abstract. Here we present another example of atimer-driven interrupt service routine. In this case, we use the timer to flash an LEDon and off at regular time intervals (Listing 13.4).AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 239
TABLE 13.1 8051 interrupt sources
Interrupt source Address IE index
Power-On Reset 0x00 -
External Interrupt 0 0x03 0
Timer 0 Overflow 0x0B 1
External Interrupt 1 0x13 2
Timer 1 Overflow 0x1B 3
UART Receive/Transmit 0x23 4
Timer 2 Overflow 0x2B 5
[Note: that many 8051s have further interrupt sources: refer to the manufacturer’s documentation for details of
the required interrupt numbers.]
The ability to ‘automatically reload’ Timer 2 simplifies the use of this timer as a
source of regular ticks. Note that Timer 0 and Timer 1 also have an auto-reloadcapability, but only when operating as an 8-bit timer . In most applications, an 8-
bit timer can only be used to generate interrupts at intervals of around 0.25 ms (orless); this is not generally useful.
Note that in this application we are using Timer 1 overflows to invoke the ISR. Aswe discussed in Chapter 11, Timer 1 does not have a 16-bit ‘auto reload’ mode; asa consequence, the timer must be manually reloaded every time it overflows: thefunction Timer_1_Manual_Reload() carries out this operation.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 265 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c 
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple timer ISR demonstration program
- Flashes an LED
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// Standard '8052' device
#include <AT89x52.h>
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3bit LED_state_G;// Flash LED on this pin
sbit LED_pin = P1^7; 
// Function prototypes
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_1_Init(void);void Timer_1_Manual_Reload(void);void LED_Flash_Init(void);
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void main(void)
{Timer_1_Init(); // Set up Timer 2LED_Flash_Init(); // Prepare to flash the LED
EA = 1; // Globally enable interruptswhile(1)
{PCON |= 0x01; // Go to sleep (idle mode)}
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_1_Init(void)
{// Timer 1 is configured as a 16-bit timer,// which is manually reloaded when it overflowsTMOD &= 0x0F; // Clear all T1 bits (T0 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x10; // Set required T1 bits (T0 left unchanged) 
// Sets up timer reload values
Timer_1_Manual_Reload();SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 240www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 266 ---
// Interrupt Timer 1 enabled
ET1 = 1;}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_1_Manual_Reload(void)
{// Stop Timer 1TR1 = 0;
// This code (generic 8051/52) assumes a 500 KHz system osc. 
// The Timer 1 resolution is then 0.000024 seconds// (see Chapter 11 for details)//// We want to generate an interrupt every second:// this takes 1.0 / 0.000024 timer increments// i.e. 41667 timer increments (approx)//// Reload value (decimal) is 65536 - 41667 -> 23869 = 0x5D3DTL1  = 0x3D;TH1  = 0x5D;
// Start Timer 1
TR1 = 1;}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void LED_Flash_Init(void)
{// Prepare to flash the LEDLED_state_G = 0;}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void LED_Flash_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow
{// Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer) on a specified port pin.// Rate determined by timer settings.
// Must manually reload the timer in this version
// (Cannot perform 16-bit auto reload with Timer 0 or Timer 1)Timer_1_Manual_Reload();
// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)
// (Do this every second)
if (LED_state_G == 1)AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 241www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 267 ---
{
LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1; LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 13.4 Using a timer-driven ISR to flash an LED on and off at regular time 
intervals
Figure 13.4 shows the program in Listing 13.4 executing in the Keil hardware simulator.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 242
FIGURE  13.4 The program in Listing 13.4 executing in the Keil hardware simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 268 ---
13.6 Executing multiple tasks at different time intervals
While the great majority of embedded systems are required to run only one pro-
gram, they do need to run multiple tasks (implemented as ‘C’ functions in this
book): these tasks must, as mentioned earlier, run on a periodic or one-shot basis.These tasks will typically have different durations and will run at different timeintervals. For example, we might need to read the input from an ADC every millisec-ond, read one or more switches every 200 milliseconds and update an LCD displayevery 3 milliseconds.
We can try to run more than one task by extending the technique discussed in
Section 13.5. For example, suppose that we have a microcontroller device with (say)three timers available and wanted to use these timers to control the execution ofthree tasks, by using a separate interrupt service routine to perform each task (Listing13.5).
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c
------------------------------------------------------------------
Multi-timer ISR program framework
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include <AT89x52.h>
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow 1#define INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow 3#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Function prototypes
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_0_Init(void);void Timer_1_Init(void);void Timer_2_Init(void);
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void main(void)
{Timer_0_Init(); // Set up Timer 0Timer_1_Init(); // Set up Timer 1Timer_2_Init(); // Set up Timer 2
EA = 1;   // Globally enable interruptswhile(1);  
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void Timer_0_Init(void)AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 243www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 269 ---
{
// Details omitted}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_1_Init(void)
{// Details omitted}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_2_Init(void)
{// Details omitted}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void X(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_0_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 1 ms
// Place required code here...
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void Y(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 2 ms
// Place required code here... 
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void Z(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 5 ms
// Place required code here...
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 13.5 The framework of an application using three independent timers to  
perform three tasksSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 244www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 270 ---
Provided we have sufficient timers available, this approach will generally work.
However, it would breach some basic software design guidelines. 
For example, in Listing 13.5, we have three different timers to manage and – if we
had 100 tasks – we would require 100 timers. This would make system maintenancevery difficult; for example, 100 changes would be required if we changed the oscilla-tor frequency. It would also be difficult to extend; for example, how can we addanother task if there are no further hardware timers available?
In addition to contravening one of the most basic software design guidelines, there
is a more specific problem with Listing 13.5. This arises in situations where more thanone interrupt occurs simultaneously. As we saw in Chapter 1, having more than oneactive interrupt in a system can result in unpredictable – and hence, unreliable – pat-terns of behaviour.
Looking back at Listing 13.5 we can see that there will inevitably be occasions
when more than one interrupt is generated at the same time. Dealing with this situa-tion is not impossible, but it would add greatly to the complexity of the application.
Overall, as we will see in the next section, use of a scheduler provides a much
cleaner solution.
13.7 What is a scheduler?
There are two ways of viewing a scheduler:
GAt one level, a scheduler can be viewed as a simple operating system that allowstasks to be called periodically or (less commonly) on a one-shot basis. 
GAt a lower level, a scheduler can be viewed as a single timer interrupt service routinethat is shared between many different tasks. As a result, only one timer needs to beinitialized, and any changes to the timing generally requires only one function to bealtered. Furthermore, we can generally use the same scheduler whether we need toexecute one, ten or 100 different tasks. Note that this ‘shared ISR’ is very similar tothe shared printing facilities (for example) provided by a desktop OS.
For example, Listing 13.6 shows how we might schedule the three tasks shown in
Listing 13.5, this time using a scheduler.
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init();
// Add the tasks (1ms tick interval)// Function_A will run every 2 ms
SCH_Add_Task(Function_A, 0, 2);
// Function_B will run every 10 ms
SCH_Add_Task(Function_B, 1, 10);AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 245www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 271 ---
// Function_C will run every 15 ms
SCH_Add_Task(Function_C, 3, 15);
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 13.6 Running three periodic tasks (at different time intervals) using a scheduler
13.8 Co-operative and pre-emptive scheduling
We have discussed in very general terms the use of a scheduler to execute functions
at particular times. Before we begin to consider the creation and use of a schedulerin detail in the next chapter, we need to appreciate that there are two broad classesof scheduler: 
GThe co-operative scheduler
GThe pre-emptive scheduler
The features of the two types of scheduler are compared in Figures 13.5 and 13.6. SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 246
The co-operative scheduler
GA co-operative scheduler provides a single-tasking system architecture
Operation:
GTasks are scheduled to run at specific times (either on a periodic or one-shot basis)
GWhen a task is scheduled to run it is added to the waiting list
GWhen the CPU is free, the next waiting task (if any) is executed
GThe task runs to completion, then returns control to the scheduler
Implementation:
GThe scheduler is simple and can be implemented in a small amount of code
GThe scheduler must allocate memory for only a single task at a time
GThe scheduler will generally be written entirely in a high-level language (such as ‘C’)
GThe scheduler is not a separate application; it becomes part of the developer’s code
Performance:
GObtaining rapid responses to external events requires care at the design stage
Reliability and safety:
GCo-operate scheduling is simple, predictable, reliable and safe
FIGURE  13.5 Features of co-operative schedulerswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 272 ---
In this book, we use mainly co-operative schedulers and will make limited use of
hybrid schedulers (Figure 13.7). Together, these two forms of scheduler will providethe facilities we require (the ability to share a timer between multiple tasks, the abilityto run both ‘periodic’ and ‘one-shot’ tasks): they do this while avoiding the complexi-ties inherent in (fully) pre-emptive environments.
The key reason why the co-operative schedulers are both reliable and predictable is
that only one task is active at any point in time: this task runs to completion, andthen returns control to the scheduler. Contrast this with the situation in a fully pre-emptive system with more than one active task. Suppose one task in such a systemwhich is reading from a port and the scheduler performs a ‘context switch’, causing adifferent task to access the same port: under these circumstances, unless we takeaction to prevent it, data may be lost or corrupted. 
This problem arises frequently in multitasking environments where we have what
are known as ‘critical sections’ of code. Such critical section are code areas that – oncestarted – must be allowed to run to completion without interruption. Examples ofcritical sections include:
GCode which modifies or reads variables, particularly global variables used for inter-task communication. In general, this is the most common form of critical section,since inter-task communication is often a key requirement.AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 247
FIGURE  13.6 Features of pre-emptive schedulersThe pre-emptive scheduler
GA pre-emptive scheduler provides a multitasking system architecture
Operation:
GTasks are scheduled to run at specific times (either on a periodic or one-shot basis)
GWhen a task is scheduled to run it is added to the waiting list
GWaiting tasks (if any) are run for a fixed period then, if not completed, are paused and placed
back in the waiting list. The next waiting task is then run for a fixed period, and so on
Implementation:
GThe scheduler is comparatively complicated, not least because features such as semaphores
must be implemented to avoid conflicts when ‘concurrent’ tasks attempt to access sharedresources
GThe scheduler must allocate memory to hold all the intermediate states of pre-empted tasks
GThe scheduler will generally be written (at least in part) in Assembly language
GThe scheduler is generally created as a separate application
Performance:
GRapid responses to external events can be obtained
Reliability and safety:
GGenerally considered to be less predictable, and less reliable, than co-operative approacheswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 273 ---
GCode which interfaces to hardware, such as ports, analog-to-digital converters
(ADCs) and so on. What happens, for example, if the same ADC is used simultane-ously by more than one task?
GCode which calls common functions. What happens, for example, if the samefunction is called simultaneously by more than one task?
In a co-operative system, these problems do not arise, since only one task is ever
active at the same time. To deal with such critical sections of code in a pre-emptivesystem, we have two main possibilities:
G‘Pause’ the scheduling by disabling the scheduler interrupt before beginning thecritical section; re-enable the scheduler interrupt when we leave the critical section. 
GOr use a ‘lock’ (or some other form of ‘semaphore mechanism’) to achieve a similarresult. 
The first solution is that, when we start accessing the shared resource (say Port X),
we disable the scheduler. This solves the immediate problem since (say) Task A will beallowed to run without interruption until it has finished with Port X. However, this‘solution’ is less than perfect. For one thing, by disabling the scheduler, we will nolonger be keeping track of the elapsed time and all timing functions will begin to drift– in this case by a period up to the duration of Task A every time we access Port X.This simply is not acceptable.
The use of locks is a better solution and appears, at first inspection, easy to imple-
ment. Before entering the critical section of code, we ‘lock’ the associated resource;SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 248
FIGURE  13.7 Features of hybrid schedulersThe hybrid scheduler
GA hybrid scheduler provides limited multitasking capabilities
Operation:
GSupports any number of co-operatively-scheduled tasks
GSupports a single pre-emptive task (which can interrupt the co-operative tasks)
Implementation:
GThe scheduler is simple and can be implemented in a small amount of code
GThe scheduler must allocate memory for two tasks at a time
GThe scheduler will generally be written entirely in a high-level language (such as ‘C’)
GThe scheduler is not a separate application; it becomes part of the developer’s code
Performance:
GRapid responses to external events can be obtained
Reliability and safety:
GWith careful design , can be as reliable as a (pure) co-operative schedulerwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 274 ---
when we have finished with the resource we ‘unlock’ it. While locked, no other
process may enter the critical section.1
This is one way we might try to achieve this: 
1Task A checks the ‘lock’ for Port X it wishes to access.
2If the section is locked, Task A waits.
3When the port is unlocked, Task A sets the lock and then uses the port.
4When Task A has finished with the port, it leaves the critical section and unlocksthe port.
Implementing this algorithm in code also seems straightforward, as illustrated in
Listing 13.7.
#define UNLOCKED   0
#define LOCKED     1
bit Lock:   //Global lock flag// ...// Ready to enter critical section
// - Wait for lock to become clear// (FOR SIMPLICITY, NO TIMEOUT CAPABILITY IS SHOWN)while(Lock == LOCKED);
// Lock is clear
// Enter critical section
// Set the Lock
Lock = LOCKED;
// CRITICAL CODE HERE //Ready to leave critical section
// Release the lockLock = UNLOCKED;
// ...
Listing 13.7 Attempting to implement a simple locking mechanism in a pre-emptive 
scheduler
However, this code cannot be guaranteed to work correctly under all circumstances. AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 249
A
1. Of course, this is only a partial solution to the problems caused by multitasking. If the purpose of
Task A is to read from an ADC, and Task B has locked the ADC when the Task A is involved, thenTask A cannot carry out its required activity. Use of locks, or any other mechanisms, will notsolve this problem; however, they may prevent the system from crashing. Of course, by using a co-operative scheduler, these problems do not arise. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 275 ---
Consider the part of the code labelled ‘A’ in Listing 13.7. If our system is fully pre-
emptive, then our task can reach this point at the same time as the schedulerperforms a context switch and allows (say) Task B access to the CPU. If Task Y alsowants to access the Port X
We can then have a situation as follows:
GTask A has checked the lock for Port X and found that the port is not locked; TaskA has, however, not yet changed the lock flag.
GTask B is then ‘switched in’. Task B checks the lock flag and it is still clear. Task Bsets the lock flag and begins to use Port X.
GTask A is ‘switched in’ again. As far as Task A is concerned, the port is not locked;this task therefore sets the flag and starts to use the port, unaware that Task B isalready doing so.
G…
As we can see, this simple lock code violates the principal of mutual exclusion:
that is, it allows more than one task to access a critical code section. The problemarises because it is possible for the context switch to occur after a task has checkedthe lock flag but before the task changes the lock flag. In other words, the lock
‘check and set code’ (designed to control access to a critical section of code), isitself a critical section.
This problem can be solved. For example, because it takes little time to ‘check and
set’ the lock code, we can disable interrupts for this period. However, this is not initself a complete solution: because there is a chance that an interrupt may haveoccurred even in the short period of ‘check and set’, we may then need to check therelevant interrupt flag(s) and, if necessary, call the relevant ISR(s). This can be done,but it adds to the complexity of the operating environment.
13.9 A closer look at pre-emptive schedulers
Various research studies have demonstrated that, compared to pre-emptive sched-ulers, co-operative schedulers have a number of desirable features. For example,Nissanke (1997, p. 237) notes: 
[Pre-emptive] schedules carry greater runtime overheads because of the need for context
switching – storage and retrieval of partially computed results. [Co-operative] algorithms do notincur such overheads. Other advantages of [co-operative] algorithms include their better under-standability, greater predictability, ease of testing and their inherent capability for guaranteeingexclusive access to any shared resource or data. SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 250
The discussion in this section is more technical than the previous sections in this
chapter and may be omitted on a first reading of the book. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 276 ---
Similarly, Allworth (1981, pp. 53–4) notes: 
Significant advantages are obtained when using this [co-operative] technique. Since the
processes are not interruptable, poor synchronisation does not give rise to the problem ofshared data. Shared subroutines can be implemented without producing re-entrant code orimplementing lock and unlock mechanisms. 
Also, in a recent presentation, Bates (2000) identified the following four advantages of
co-operative scheduling, compared to pre-emptive alternatives: 
1The scheduler is simpler
2The overheads are reduced
3Testing is easier
4Certification authorities tend to support this form of scheduling
Despite these observations, all the authors cited and the vast majority of other
workers in this area focus on the use of pre-emptive schedulers. At least part of thereason why pre-emptive approaches are more widely discussed is because of confu-sion over the options available. For example, Bennett (1994, p. 205) states: 
If we consider the scheduling of time allocation on a single CPU there are two basic alternatives:
[1] cyclic, [2] pre-emptive. 
In fact, contrary to Bennett’s assertion, what he refers to as cyclic scheduling is
essentially a form of SUPER LOOP [page 162]. As we saw in Chapter 9, this type of
architecture is suitable only for use in a restricted range of very simple applications, inparticular those where accurate timing is not a key requirement and limited memoryand CPU resources are available: 
SUPER LOOP is not representative of the broad range
of co-operative scheduling architectures that are available. 
Bennett is, however, not alone: other researchers make similar assumptions
(see Barnett, 1995). For example, Locke (1992, p. 37) – in a widely cited publication –suggests that:
Traditionally, there have been two basic approaches to the overall design of application
systems exhibiting hard real-time deadlines: the cyclic executive … and the fixed priority [pre-emptive] architecture.
Similarly, Cooling (1991, pp. 292–3) compares co-operative and pre-emptive schedul-
ing approaches. Again, however, his discussion of co-operative schedulers is restrictedto a consideration of the special case of cyclic scheduling: as a result, his conclusionthat a pre-emptive approach is more effective is unsurprising. 
Where the different characteristics of pre-emptive and co-operative scheduling are
compared equitably, the main concern expressed is often that long tasks will have animpact on the responsiveness of a co-operative scheduler. This concern is succinctlysummarized by Allworth (1981): 
[The] main drawback with this [co-operative] approach is that while the current process is run-
ning, the system is not responsive to changes in the environment. Therefore, system processesmust be extremely brief if the real-time response [of the] system is not to be impaired.AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 251www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 277 ---
There are four main technical reasons why such concerns are, generally, misplaced:
GIn many embedded applications, the task duration isextremely brief. For example,
consider one of the more complex algorithms considered in this book: proportionalintegral differential (PID) control. Even the most basic 8051 microcontroller cancarry out a PID calculation in around 0.4 ms (see p. 872): even in flight control –where PID algorithms remain in widespread use – sample rates of around 10 ms arecommon, and a 0.4 ms calculation does not impose a significant processor load. 
GWhere the system does have long tasks, this is often because the developer isunaware of some simple techniques that can be used to break down these tasks inan appropriate way and – in effect – convert ‘long tasks called infrequently’ into‘short tasks called frequently’. Such techniques are used throughout this book; theyare introduced and explained in Chapter 16.
GIn many cases, the increased power of microcontrollers has more than kept upwith performance demands in many embedded systems. For example, the PID per-formance figures just given assumed an original 8051 microcontroller, with a 1MIPS performance level. As we saw in Chapter 3, numerous low-cost members ofthis family now have performance levels between 5 and 50 MIPS. Often a simple,cost-effective, way of addressing performance concerns is not to use a more com-plex software architecture, but, instead, to update the hardware.
GIf upgrades to the task design or microcontroller do not provide sufficient perform-ance improvements, then more than one microcontroller can be used. This is nowvery common. For example, a typical automotive environment containing morethan 40 embedded processors (Leen et al., 1999). With the increased availability of
such processing elements, long tasks may be readily ‘migrated’ to another proces-sor, leaving the main CPU free to respond rapidly, if necessary, to other events. (SeePart F of this book for numerous examples of this process.)
Finally, it should be noted that the reasons why pre-emptive schedulers have been
more widely discussed and used may not be for technical reasons at all: in fact, theuse of pre-emptive environments can be seen to have clear commercial advantages forsome companies. For example, a co-operative scheduler may be easily constructed,entirely in a high-level programming language, in around 300 lines of ‘C’ code, as wedemonstrate in Chapter 9. The code is highly portable, easy to understand and to useand is, in effect, freely available. By contrast, the increased complexity of a pre-emptive operating environment results in a much larger code framework (some tentimes the size, even in a simple implementation: Labrosse, 1998). The size and com-plexity of this code makes it unsuitable for ‘in-house’ construction in most situationsand therefore provides the basis for a commercial ‘RTOS’ products to be sold, gener-ally at high prices and often with expensive run-time royalties to be paid. Thecontinued promotion and sale of such environments has, in turn, prompted furtheracademic interest in this area. For example, according to Liu and Ha, (1995): 
[An] objective of reengineering is the adoption of commercial off-the-shelf and standard operat-
ing systems. Because they do not support cyclic scheduling, the adoption of these operatingsystems makes it necessary for us to abandon this traditional approach to scheduling.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 252www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 278 ---
13.10 Conclusions
In this chapter, we have explained what a scheduler is and outlined the differences
between co-operative and pre-emptive scheduling. We have argued that a co-operativescheduler provides a simple and reliable operating environment that matches pre-cisely the needs of most embedded applications.
Over recent years we have used versions of the co-operative schedulers presented in
this book in numerous ‘real’ applications. We have also helped many student groupsuse this architecture in their first embedded systems. We have no doubt that the cor-rect use of these schedulers not only results in simple, transparent and reliabledesigns, but also make it easier for ‘desktop’ developers to adapt rapidly to the chal-lenges of embedded system development.
13.11 Further reading
Allworth, S.T. (1981) An Introduction to Real-Time Software Design , Macmillan, London.
Bates, I. (2000) “Introduction to scheduling and timing analysis”, in The Use of Ada in
Real-Time System (6 April, 2000). IEE Conference Publication 00/034.
Burns, A. and Wellings, A. (1997) Real-Time Systems and Programming Languages ,
Addison-Wesley, London.
Cooling, J.E. (1991) Software Design for Real-Time Systems , Chapman and Hall, London.
Kopetz, H. (1997) Real-Time Systems: Design Principles for Distributed Embedded
Applications , Kluwer Academic, New York.
Leen, G., Heffernan, D. and Dunne, A. (1999) ‘Digital networks in the automotive
vehicle’, Computing and Control , 10 (6): 257–266.
Leveson, N.G. (1995) Safeware: System Safety and Computers , Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.
Liu, J.W.S. and Ha, R. (1995) ‘Methods for validating real-time constraints’ Journal of
Systems and Software , 30 (1–2), 85–98.
Locke, C.D. (1992) ‘Software architecture for hard real-time applications: Cyclic exec-
utives vs. Fixed priority executives’, The Journal of Real-Time Systems , 4: 37–53.
Nissanke, N. (1997) Realtime Systems , Prentice Hall, London.
Shaw, A.C. (2001) Real-Time Systems and Software , Wiley, New York.
Storey, N. (1996) Safety-Critical Computer Systems , Addison-Wesley, London.
Ward, N.J. (1991) ‘The static analysis of a safety-critical avionics control system’, in
D.E. Corbyn, and N.P. Bray (eds) Air Transport Safety: Proceedings of the Safety and
Reliability Society Spring Conference , 1991 , SaRS.AN INTRODUCTION TO SCHEDULERS 253www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 279 ---
Co-operative schedulers
Introduction
In this chapter, we discuss techniques for creating co-operative schedulers suitable for
use in single-processor environments. These provide a very flexible and predictablesoftware platform for a wide range of embedded applications, from the simplest con-sumer gadget up to and including aircraft control systems. 
The following pattern is presented in this chapter:
GCO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255]
A co-operative scheduler provides a simple, highly predictable environment. The
scheduler is written entirely in ‘C’ and becomes part of the application: this tends tomake the operation of the whole system more transparent and eases development,maintenance and porting to different environments. Memory overheads are sevenbytes per task and CPU requirements (which vary with tick interval) are low. chapter14www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 280 ---
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application is to have a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create and use a co-operative scheduler?
Background
We present some links to relevant background material in this section.
What is a co-operative scheduler?
See Chapter 13 for an introduction to co-operative schedulers.
Function pointers
One area of the language with which many ‘C’ programmers are unfamiliar is thefunction pointer. While comparatively rarely used in desktop programs, this languagefeature is crucial in the creation of schedulers: we therefore provide a brief introduc-tory example here.
The key point to note is that – just as we can, for example, determine the starting
address of an array of data in memory – we can also find the address in memory atwhich the executable code for a particular function begins. This address can be usedas a ‘pointer’ to the function; most importantly, it can be used to call the function.
Used with care, function pointers can make it easier to design and implement com-
plex programs. For example, suppose we are developing a large, safety-critical,application, controlling an industrial plant. If we detect a critical situation, we maywish to shut down the system as rapidly as possible. However, the appropriate way toshut down the system will vary, depending on the system state. What we can do iscreate a number of different recovery functions and a function pointer. Every timethe system state changes, we can alter the function pointer so that it is always point-ing to the most appropriate recovery function. In this way, we know that – if there isever an emergency situation – we can rapidly call the most appropriate function, bymeans of the function pointer.
The example in Listings 14.1 and 14.2 illustrates some of the basic features of
function pointers.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 255www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 281 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration of function pointers.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Printf51.h"#include <stdio.h>
// ------ Private function prototypes -----------------------------
void Square_Number(int, int*);
/* ................................................................. */
/* ................................................................. */
int main(void)
{int a = 2, b = 3; void (* pFn)(int, int*); /* Declares pFn to be a pointer to fn with 
int and int pointer parameters (returning void) */
int Result_a, Result_b;// Prepare to use printf() [in Keil hardware simulator]
Printf51_Init();
pFn = Square_Number; // pFn holds address of Square_Numberprintf("Function code starts at address: %u\n", (tWord) pFn);
printf("Data item a starts at address: %u\n\n", (tWord) &a);
// Call 'Square_Number' in the conventional way
Square_Number(a,&Result_a);
// Call 'Square_Number' using function pointer
(*pFn)(b,&Result_b);
printf("%d squared is %d (using normal fn call)\n", a, Result_a); 
printf("%d squared is %d (using fn pointer)\n", b, Result_b); 
while(1);
return 0;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Square_Number(int a, int* b)
{SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 256www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 282 ---
// Demo - calculate square of a
*b = a * a;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.1 Part of an example introducing the use of function pointers
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Printf51.C (v1.00)------------------------------------------------------------------
A simple serial initialization routine to allow Keil hardware
simulator to be used to run 'desktop' C examples.
[Full details of a complete serial interface library are given
in Chapter 18. This code is for demo purposes only!!! ]
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Printf51.h"
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Printf51_Init()
A simple serial initialization routine to allow Keil hardware
simulator to be used to run 'desktop' C examples.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Printf51_Init(void)
{const tWord BAUD_RATE = 9600;
PCON &= 0x7F; // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don't double baud rates)
//  Receiver enabled.
//  8-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, //  Variable baud rate (asynchronous)//  Receive flag will only be set if a valid stop bit is received//  Set TI (transmit buffer is empty)SCON = 0x72;
TMOD |= 0x20; // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reload// See Main.H for details of OSC_FREQ and OSC_PER_INST
TH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 257www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 283 ---
TL1 = TH1; 
TR1 = 1; // Run the timer
TI = 1; // Send dummy byte// Interrupt *NOT* enabled
ES = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.2 Part of an example introducing the use of function pointers 
[Note: that this listing prepares the UART on the 80x52 microcontroller, so that we can use the Keil printf() library function. This
example is for illustrative purposes only; we present a complete serial library example in Chapter 18.]
The program in Listings 14.1 and 14.2 generate the output shown in Figure 14.1 in
the Keil hardware simulator.
Solution
A scheduler has the following key components:
GThe scheduler data structure.
GAn initialization function.
GA single interrupt service routine (ISR), used to update the scheduler at regular timeintervals.
GA function for adding tasks to the scheduler.
GA dispatcher function that causes tasks to be executed when they are due to run.
GA function for removing tasks from the scheduler (not required in all applications).
We consider each of the required components in this section.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 258
FIGURE  14.1 Using function pointers
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 284 ---
Overview
Before discussing the scheduler components, we consider how the scheduler will
typically appear to the user. To do this we will use a simple example: a scheduler usedto flash a single LED on and off repeatedly: on for one second off for one second etc. 
Listing 14.3 shows how we might achieve this 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Init();
// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// Update the task list...} 
Listing 14.3 The key components from a simple scheduled application
Listing 14.3 operates as follows:
1We assume that the LED will be switched on and off by means of a ‘task’
LED_Flash_Update() . Thus, if the LED is initially off and we call
LED_Flash_Update() twice, we assume that the LED will be switched on and
then switched off again. 
To obtain the required flash rate, we therefore require that the scheduler calls
LED_Flash_Update() every second ad infinitum .
2We prepare the scheduler using the function SCH_Init_T2() .CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 259www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 285 ---
3After preparing the scheduler, we add the function LED_Flash_Update() to the
scheduler task list using the SCH_Add_Task() function. At the same time we spec-
ify that the LED will be turned on and off at the required rate as follows:
// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
(We will shortly consider all the parameters of SCH_Add_Task() , and examine its
internal structure).
4The timing of the LED_Flash_Update() function will be controlled by the function
SCH_Update() , an interrupt service routine triggered by the overflow of Timer 2:
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// Update the task list...} 
5The ‘Update’ ISR does not execute the task: it calculates when a task is due to run
and sets a flag. The job of executing LED_Flash_Update() falls to the dispatcher
function (SCH_Dispatch_Tasks() ), which runs in the main (‘super’) loop:
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
Before considering these components in detail, we should acknowledge that this is,
undoubtedly, a complicated way of flashing an LED: if our intention were to developan LED flasher application that required minimal memory and minimal code size,this would notbe a good solution. However, the key point is that we will be able to
use the same scheduler architecture in all our subsequent examples, including a
number of substantial and complex applications and the effort required to under-stand the operation of this environment will be rapidly repaid.
It should also be emphasized that the scheduler is a ‘low-cost’ option: it consumes
a small percentage of the CPU resources (we will consider precise percentages shortly).In addition, the scheduler itself requires no more than 7 bytes of memory for eachtask. Since a typical application will require no more than four to six tasks, the task –memory budget (around 40 bytes) is not excessive, even on an 8-bit microcontroller.
The scheduler data structure and task array
At the heart of the scheduler is the scheduler data structure: this is a user-defined datatype which collects together the information required about each task.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 260www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 286 ---
The data structure is reproduced (from file Sch51.H ) here:
// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access 
// Total memory per task is 7 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a 'void (void)' function)void (code * pTask)(void); 
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay; 
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period; 
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe; } sTask; 
File Sch51.H also includes the constant SCH_MAX_TASKS :
// The maximum number of tasks required at any one time
// during the execution of the program//// MUST BE ADJUSTED FOR EACH NEW PROJECT#define SCH_MAX_TASKS (1) 
Both the sTask data type and the SCH_MAX_TASKS constant are used to create – in
the file Sch51.C – the array of tasks that is referred to throughout the scheduler:
// The array of tasks
sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 261
The size of the task array
You must ensure that the task array is sufficiently large to store the tasks required in
your application, by adjusting the value of SCH_MAX_TASKS .
For example, if you schedule three tasks as follows:
SCH_Add_Task(Function_A, 0, 2);
SCH_Add_Task(Function_B, 1, 10);SCH_Add_Task(Function_C, 3, 15);
then SCH_MAX_TASKS must have a value of three (or more) for correct operation of
the scheduler.
Note also that, if this condition is not satisfied, the scheduler will generate an
error code (see page 274).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 287 ---
The initialization function
Like most of the tasks we wish to schedule, the scheduler itself requires an initializa-
tion function. While this performs various important operations – such as preparingthe scheduler array (discussed earlier) and the error code variable (discussed later) –the main purpose of this function is to set up a timer that will be used to generate theregular ‘ticks’ that will drive the scheduler.
As we saw in Chapter 11, most 8051 devices have three timers (Timer 0, Timer 1
and Timer 2) and any of these may be used to drive the scheduler. However, onlyTimer 2 can be used as an auto-reload timer with 16-bit resolution: as a result, use ofthis timer is appropriate, if it is available.
One possible initialization function (using Timer 2) is illustrated in 
Listing 14.4. 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function. Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0; 
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 262
Note that there are numerous different 8051 schedulers included on the CD
accompanying this book: the different schedulers illustrate the use of all three of theavailable timers.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 288 ---
// - this takes 1000 timer ticks
// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04; // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00; // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC; // load timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC; // load timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x18; // load timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18; // load timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2 = 1; // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2 = 1; // Start Timer 2
}
Listing 14.4 One possible scheduler initialization function
When using any of the schedulers in this book, you will generally need to adapt the
initialization code to match your needs. In particular, you will need to ensure that:
1The oscillator / resonator frequency assumed in the initialization functionmatches your hardware. In Listing 14.4 the frequency assumed is 12 MHz.
2The tick interval of the scheduler matches your requirements. In Listing 14.4 thetick interval is 1 ms.
Guidance on the choice of the tick interval is provided below in ‘Reliability and
safety implications’.
The ‘Update’ function
The ‘Update’ function is the scheduler ISR. It is invoked by the overflow of the timer
(set up using the ‘Init’ function, as discussed in the previous section).
Like most of the scheduler, the update function is not complex (see Listing 14.5).CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 263
The ‘one interrupt per microcontroller’ rule
The scheduler initialization function enables the generation of interrupts associated
with the overflow of one of the microcontroller timers.
For reasons discussed in Chapter 1, it is assumed throughout this book that
only the ‘tick’ interrupt source is active: specifically, it is assumed that no otherinterrupts are enabled .
If you attempt to use the scheduler code with additional interrupts enabled,
the system cannot be guaranteed to operate at all: at best, you will generallyobtain very unpredictable, and unreliable, system behaviour.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 289 ---
When it determines that a task is due to run, the update function increments the
RunMe field for this task: the task will then be executed by the dispatcher, as we dis-
cuss later.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Update()
This is the scheduler ISR. It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in the 'init' function.
This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:
timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. 
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{
// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1; // Inc. the 'RunMe' flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
} 
}
} 
Listing 14.5 A scheduler ‘update’ functionSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 264www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 290 ---
The ‘Add Task’ function
As the name suggests, the ‘Add Task’ function is used to add tasks to the task array, to
ensure that they are called at the required time(s).
The parameters for the ‘Add Task’ function are described in Figure 14.2.Here are some examples.This set of parameters causes the function Do_X() to be executed once after 1,000
scheduler ticks:
SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
This does the same, but saves the task ID (the position in the task array) so that the
task may be subsequently deleted, if necessary (see SCH_Delete_Task() for further
information about the removal of tasks from the task array):
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
This causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly every 1,000 scheduler ticks;
the task will first be executed as soon as the scheduling is started:
SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,0,1000);
This causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly every 1,000 scheduler
ticks; task will be first executed at T = 300 ticks, then 1,300, 2,300 etc:
SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,300,1000);
The function itself is shown in Listing 14.6.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 265
FIGURE  14.2 The parameters of the SCH_Add_Task() functionPeriod
the interval (in ticks)
between repeatedexecutions of the task.If set to 0, the task isexecuted only onceTask_Namethe name of thefunction (task) thatyou wish to scheduleInitial_Delaythe delay (in ticks)
before task is firstexecuted. If set to 0,the task is executedimmediately
Sch_Add_Task ( Task_Name , Initial_Delay , Period);www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 291 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Add_Task()Causes a task (function) to be executed at regular intervals 
or after a user-defined delay
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCH_Add_Task(void (code * pFunction)(), 
const tWord DELAY, const tWord PERIOD) 
{tByte Index = 0;
// First find a gap in the array (if there is one)
while ((SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask != 0) && (Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS))
{Index++;} 
// Have we reached the end of the list? 
if (Index == SCH_MAX_TASKS)
{// Task list is full//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS;
// Also return an error code
return SCH_MAX_TASKS; 
}
// If we're here, there is a space in the task array
SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask  = pFunction;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay  = DELAY;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period = PERIOD;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe  = 0;return Index; // return position of task (to allow later deletion)
}
Listing 14.6 An implementation of the scheduler ‘add task’ function 
The ‘Dispatcher’
As we have seen, the ‘Update’ function does not execute any tasks: the tasks that are
due to run are invoked through the ‘Dispatcher’ function.
Details of the dispatcher are given in Listing 14.7.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 266www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 292 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks()This is the 'dispatcher' function. When a task (function)
is due to run, SCH_Dispatch_Tasks() will run it.This function must be called (repeatedly) from the main loop.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void) 
{tByte Index;
// Dispatches (runs) the next task (if one is ready)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe > 0) 
{(*SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)(); // Run the task
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe -= 1; // Reset / reduce RunMe flag// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a 'one shot' task, remove it from the arrayif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{SCH_Delete_Task(Index);}
}
}
// Report system status
SCH_Report_Status(); 
// The scheduler enters idle mode at this point 
SCH_Go_To_Sleep(); }
Listing 14.7 An implementation of the scheduler ‘dispatch task’ function 
The dispatcher is the only component in the Super Loop:
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void main(void)
{
...
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 267www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 293 ---
Do we need a Dispatch function?
At first inspection, the use of both the ‘Update’ and ‘Dispatch’ functions may seem a
rather complicated way of running the tasks. Specifically, it may appear that theDispatch function in unnecessary and that the Update function could invoke thetasks directly. However, the split between the Update and Dispatch operations is nec-essary, to maximize the reliability of the scheduler in the presence of long tasks.
Suppose we have a scheduler with a tick interval of 1 ms and, for whatever reason,
a scheduled task sometimes has a duration of 3 ms.
If the Update function runs the functions directly then – all the time the long task
is being executed – the tick interrupts are effectively disabled. Specifically, two ‘ticks’will be missed. This will mean that all system timing is seriously affected and maymean that two (or more) tasks are not scheduled to execute at all.
If the Update and Dispatch function are separated, system ticks can still be processed
while the long task is executing. This means that we will suffer task ‘jitter’ (the ‘missing’tasks will not be run at the correct time), but these tasks will, eventually, run.
Function pointers and Keil linker options
When we write:
SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
the first parameter of the ‘Add Task’ function is a pointer to the function Do_X() . This
function pointer is then passed to the Dispatch function and it is through this func-tion that the task is executed:
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe > 0) 
{(*SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)();  // Run the task
We discussed the use of function pointers in ‘Background’. The use of the ‘C’ func-
tion pointers on small microcontrollers presents a challenge. This is particularly truewhen function pointers are used as function arguments.
On desktop systems, function arguments are generally passed on the stack using
the push and pop assembly instructions. Since the 8051 has a size limited stack (only128 bytes at best and as low as 64 bytes on some devices), function arguments mustbe passed using a different technique: in the case of Keil C51, these arguments arestored in fixed memory locations. When the linker is invoked, it builds a call tree ofthe program, decides which function arguments are mutually exclusive (that is,which functions cannot be called at the same time) and overlays these arguments. 
The linker has difficulty determining the correct call tree when function pointers
are used as function arguments, as is the case with the ‘Add Task’ function. To dealwith this situation, you have two realistic options:
1You can prevent the compiler from using the OVERLAY directive by disabling
overlays as part of the linker options for your project. 
Note that, compared to applications using overlays, you will generally require
more RAM to run your program.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 268www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 294 ---
2You can tell the linker how to create the correct call tree for your application by
explicitly providing this information in the linker ‘Additional Options’ dialogue box. 
This solution generally uses less memory, but the compiler often cannot tell if
you provide incorrect information: if you get this option wrong, your program cangenerate unpredictable results.
The linker options required are not difficult to understand. Suppose we have run
our simple flashing LED example presented earlier in this chapter and we are schedul-ing a single task, as follows:
void main(void)
{
//...// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
//...
The linker assumes – because the pointer LED_Flash_Update appears in main() –
that the function is called from main() . Instead, the function is called from
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks.
We make this change explicit using the linker options thus:
OVERLAY
(main ~ (LED_Flash_Update), SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (LED_Flash_Update))
If you look at the various project files on the CD, you will find that the required
linker options have already been implemented.
For further information on function pointers, refer to the Keil compiler documen-
tation and to Keil Application Note 129 (included on the CD).CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 269
Are function pointers safe?
Is it dangerous to use a scheduler based on function pointers? Will the use of func-
tion pointers make your program less reliable? The answer to both questions is ‘no’,with some caveats.
Before concluding that use of function pointers is not safe, we need to consider
the alternatives. You can create a scheduler without using function pointers (and wehave created several in this way). However, the resulting code tends to be larger,less flexible, less easy to adapt and less easy to read than the pointer-based version.In our experience, these factors together have a detrimental impact on reliabilitythat far outweighs the advantages gained by avoiding function pointers.Lwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 295 ---
The ‘Start’ function
The ‘Start’ function is very simple (see Listing 14.8). After all the tasks have been
added, this function is called to begin the scheduling process. The function achievesthis by globally enabling interrupts.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
Listing 14.8 An implementation of the scheduler ‘start’ function 
The ‘Delete Task’ function
When tasks are added to the task array, SCH_Add_Task() returns the position in the
task array at which the task has been added:
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
Sometimes it can be necessary to delete tasks from the array. To do so,
SCH_Delete_Task() can be used as follows:
SCH_Delete_Task(Task_ID);
Details of SCH_Delete_Task() are given in Listing 14.9.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit SCH_Delete_Task(const tByte TASK_INDEX) 
{bit Return_code;
if (SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask == 0)
{// No task at this location...//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK;SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 270
If you opt not to use the Keil OVERLAY directive, you do not need to be con-
cerned with the complexities of function pointers. If you do not feel comfortablewith the use of such pointers or if your code may subsequently be maintained byless experienced developers, then – with current versions of the Keil compiler – thisis the most appropriate option.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 296 ---
// ...also return an error code
Return_code = RETURN_ERROR;}
else
{Return_code = RETURN_NORMAL;} 
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask = 0x0000;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Delay = 0;SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Period = 0;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].RunMe = 0;return Return_code; // return status
}
Listing 14.9 An implementation of the scheduler ‘delete task’ function
Reducing power consumption
An important feature of scheduled applications is that they can lend themselves to
low-power operation. This is possible because all current members of the 8051 familyprovide an ‘idle’ mode, where the CPU activity is halted, but the state of the processoris maintained. In this mode, the power required to run the processor is typicallyreduced by around 50%. 
This idle mode is particularly effective in scheduled applications because it may be
entered under software control (as shown in Listing 14.10), and the microcontrollerreturns to the normal operating mode when any interrupt is received. Because thescheduler generates regular timer interrupts as a matter of course, we can put thesystem ‘ to sleep’ at the end of every dispatcher call: it will then wake up when thenext timer tick occurs.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Go_To_Sleep()
{PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (generic 8051 version)
// Entering idle mode requires TWO consecutive instructions 
// on 80c515 / 80c505 - to avoid accidental triggering//PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (#1)//PCON |= 0x20;    // Enter idle mode (#2)}
Listing 14.10 An implementation of the scheduler ‘sleep’ functionCO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 271www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 297 ---
Reporting errors
Hardware fails; software is never perfect; errors are a fact of life. 
To report errors at any part of the scheduled application, we use an (8-bit) error
code variable Error_code_G , which is defined in Sch51.C as follows:
// Used to display the error code
tByte Error_code_G = 0;
To record an error we include lines such as:
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CAN_BUS_ERROR;Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64;
These error codes are given in the file Main.H which is an example of the pattern
PROJECT HEADER [page 169].
To report these error codes, the scheduler has a function SCH_Report_Status() ,
which is called from the Update function. 
One possible implementation is shown in Listing 14.11.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Report_Status(void)
{
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// ONLY APPLIES IF WE ARE REPORTING ERRORS// Check for a new error codeif (Error_code_G != Last_error_code_G)
{// Negative logic on LEDs assumedError_port = 255 - Error_code_G;
Last_error_code_G = Error_code_G;if (Error_code_G != 0)
{Error_tick_count_G = 60000;}
else
{Error_tick_count_G = 0;}SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 272www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 298 ---
}
else
{if (Error_tick_count_G != 0)
{if (--Error_tick_count_G == 0)
{Error_code_G = 0; // Reset error code}
}
}
#endif
}
Listing 14.11 An implementation of the scheduler ‘report status’ function
Note that error reporting may be disabled via the Port.H header file:
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
Where error reporting is required, the port on which error codes will be displayed
is also determined via Port.H :
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif
Note that, in this implementation, error codes are reported for 60,000 ticks (1
minute at a 1 ms tick rate). 
The simplest way of displaying these codes is to attach eight LEDs (with suitable
buffers) to the error port, as discussed in IC DRIVER [page 134]: Figure 14.3 illustrates
one possible approach.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 273
What does that error code mean?
The forms of error reporting discussed here are low-level in nature and are primarily
intended to assist the developer of the application or a qualified service engineerperforming system maintenance. An additional user interface may also be requiredin your application to notify the user of errors, in a more user-friendly manner.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 299 ---
Adding a watchdog
The basic scheduler presented here does not provide support for a watchdog timer.
Such support can be useful and is easily added, as follows:
GStart the watchdog in the scheduler Start function.
GRefresh the watchdog in the scheduler Update function.
Hardware resource implications
We consider the hardware resource implications under three main headings: timers,memory and CPU load.
Timer
This pattern requires one hardware timer. If possible, this should be a 16-bit timer,with auto-reload capabilities, such as Timer 2 (see Chapter 13 for details).
Memory
This main scheduler memory requirement is seven bytes of memory per task. Mostapplications require around six tasks or fewer. Even in a standard 8051/8052 with 256bytes of internal memory the total memory overhead is small.
CPU load
Probably the main reason why some developers still do not use a scheduler is concernabout the CPU load this architecture will impose. Such concerns are generally mis-placed since, in a typical application, an average of around 5% of the available CPUtime is consumed by the scheduler.
To illustrate this consider, first, the worst-case scenario: a Standard 8051, operating
at 12 machine cycles per oscillator cycle used to schedule a single, simple, task (flash-ing an LED on and off). We will further assume that the scheduler is required toprovide a 1 ms tick interval and the oscillator frequency is 12 MHz.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 274
FIGURE  14.3 Hardware for reporting error codes8051 devicePort 2
ULN2803AP2.0 - Pin 8
P2.1 - Pin 7P2.2 - Pin 6P2.3 - Pin 5P2.4 - Pin 4P2.5 - Pin 3P2.6 - Pin 2P2.7 - Pin 1
Pin 11 - LED 0
Pin 12 - LED 1Pin 13 - LED 2Pin 14 - LED 3Pin 15 - LED 4Pin 16 - LED 5Pin 17 - LED 6Pin 18 - LED 7
9LED 7 LED 6 LED 5 LED 4 LED 3 LED 2 LED 1 LED 0Vcc
RledRledRledRledRledRledRledRledFor 25mA LEDs, Rled = 120 Ohmswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 300 ---
We can simulate this system using the Keil hardware simulator (included on the CD).
This reveals that the largest CPU load is imposed by the scheduler ‘update’ ISR. In total, allthe scheduler processing consumes around 14% of the available CPU time (Figure 14.4).
If we add another task, the scheduler is still 80% ‘idle’ (Figure 14.5).
In most situations, around 12 tasks is the maximum number we would expect to
be able to schedule in such an application. Figure 14.6 shows this situation.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 275
FIGURE  14.4 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
1ms ticks, running on a 12 MHz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051 86% idle 
[Note: One task is being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 86% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is therefore
approximately 0.86 ms.]
FIGURE  14.5 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
1ms ticks, running on a 12 MHz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051 80% idle
[Note: Two tasks are being executed. The test reveals that the CPU is 80% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is there-
fore approximately 0.80 ms.]
FIGURE  14.6 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
1 ms ticks, running on a 12 MHz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051 11% idle.
[Note: Twelve tasks are being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 11% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is there-
fore approximately 0.11 ms.]
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 301 ---
Of course, by modern standards, this 12 MHz / 12 Osc cycles 8051 is a slow device.
Figure 14.7 shows the same application (running a single task), adapted to operate ona 24 MHz version of the scheduler: this application is 93% idle.
Similarly, the same application adapted for the Dallas 320/520 (32 MHz) version
is seen to be 98% idle when running in Figure 14.8 (left). The same system canvery comfortably run 12 tasks (Figure 14.8 (right)) and remains 85% idle under thesecircumstances.
Finally, Figure 14.9 shows a 12 Mhz / 12 clocks 8051 running a scheduler with a 10
ms tick. On the right, the system is running one task and is 98% idle: on the right,the system is running 12 tasks and is 91% idle.
Reliability and safety implications
In this section we consider some key reliability and safety implications.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 276
FIGURE  14.7 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
1 ms ticks, running on a 24 Mhz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051
[Note: One task is being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 93% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is therefore
approximately 0.93 ms.]
FIGURE  14.8 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
1 ms ticks, running on a 32 MHz (4 oscillations per instruction) 8051 
[Note: [Left] One task is being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 97% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is
therefore approximately 0.97 ms. [Right] Twelve tasks are being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 85% idle and that the maxi-
mum possible task duration is therefore approximately 0.85 ms. 
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 302 ---
Make sure the task array is large enough
See ‘Solution’ for details.
Take care with function pointers
See ‘Background’ and ‘Solution’ for details.
Dealing with task overlap
Suppose we have two tasks in our application (Task A, Task B). We further assume that
Task A is to run every second and Task B every three seconds. We assume also thateach task has a duration of around 0.5 ms. 
Suppose we schedule the tasks as follows (assuming a 1ms tick interval):
SCH_Add_Task(TaskA,0,1000);
SCH_Add_Task(TaskB,0,3000);
In this case, the two tasks will sometimes be due to execute at the same time. On
these occasions, both tasks will run, but Task B will always execute after Task A (seeListing 14.5 and Listing 14.6 for details). This will mean that if Task A varies in dura-tion, then Task B will suffer from ‘jitter’: it will not be called at the correct time whenthe tasks overlap.
Alternatively, suppose we schedule the tasks as follows:
SCH_Add_Task(TaskA,0,1000);
SCH_Add_Task(TaskB,5,3000);
Now, both tasks still run every 1,000 ms and 3,000 ms (respectively), as required.
However, Task A is explicitly scheduled always to run 5 ms before Task B. As a result,Task B will always run on time.
In many cases, we can avoid all (or most) task overlaps simply by the judicious use
of the initial task delays.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 277
FIGURE  14.9 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a scheduler with
10 ms ticks, running on a 12 MHz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051
[Note: [Left] One task is being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 98% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is
therefore approximately 9.8 ms. [Right] Twelve tasks are being executed . The test reveals that the CPU is 91% idle and that the maxi-
mum possible task duration is therefore approximately 9.1 ms.]
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 303 ---
Determining the required tick interval
Throughout this book, our main focus is in applications which operate on a millisec-
ond timescale. Thus, the various tasks you will be adding to the scheduler willtypically have task intervals of (say) 12 ms, 3 ms and 1,000 ms. 
In most instances, the simplest way of meeting the needs of the various task inter-
vals is to allocate a scheduler tick interval of 1 ms. This is easily done: see 
HARDWARE
DELAY [page 194] and Chapter 13 for details.
Remember, however, that the scheduler itself will impose a CPU load on the micro-
controller and that this load will increase dramatically at low tick intervals (see‘Hardware resource implications’). To keep the scheduler load as low as possible (and toreduce the power consumption: see the following), it can help to use a long tick interval.
If you want to reduce overheads and power consumption to a minimum, the
scheduler tick interval should be set to match the ‘greatest common factor’ of all thetask (and offset intervals). This is easily calculated, if you remember some simple highschool mathematics.
Suppose we have three tasks (X,Y,Z), and Task X is to be run every 10 ms, Task Y
every 30 ms and Task Z every 25 ms. The scheduler tick interval needs to be set bydetermining the relevant factors, as follows:
GThe factors2of the Task X interval (10 ms) are: 1 ms, 2 ms, 5 ms and 10 ms. 
GSimilarly, the factors of the Task Y interval (30 ms) are as follows: 1 ms, 2 ms, 3 ms,5 ms, 6 ms, 10 ms, 15 ms and 30 ms.
GFinally, the factors of the Task Z interval (25 ms) are as follows: 1 ms, 5 ms and 25 ms.
In this case, therefore, the greatest common factor is 5 ms: this is the required tick
interval.
Note that it may seem that if you have task intervals of (say) 5 ms, 25 ms and 1,000 ms,
this process will be extremely tedious, because 1,000 will have many factors. However, inpractice, we are only concerned with the factors up to and including the smallest of thetask intervals. In this case, therefore, we would be only interested in the factors of 5, 25and 1,000 between 1 and 5. The largest common factor being, in this case, 5 ms.
The situation becomes slightly more complicated if we consider the initial task delays. 
If we go back to our earlier example, suppose we have decided to use a 5 ms sched-
uler. We are adding three tasks to the scheduler as follows:
SCH_Add_Task(X, 0, 2);
SCH_Add_Task(Y, 0, 6);SCH_Add_Task(Z, 0, 5);
Clearly, these tasks are going to frequently overlap. For example, every time Task Y
is scheduled to run, so is Task X; on some occasions, all three tasks are due to runsimultaneously. To avoid this, we can add some initial task delays, as follows:SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 278
2. Remember: the factors are integers (between 1 and X) by which we can divide X and obtain a
remainder of 0.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 304 ---
GTask X is to be run every 10 ms: we start this task immediately.
GTask Z is to be run every 25 ms: we start this task after 2 ms.
GTask Y is to be run every 30 ms; we start this task after 1 ms.
When determining the required scheduler interval, we must now take into account
both the task intervals and the initial delays. This, in this case, we now need to findthe greatest common factor of 10, 25, 30, 1 and 2: this suggests that a scheduler inter-val of 1 ms is now required.
Guidelines for predictable and reliable scheduling
1For precise scheduling, the scheduler tick interval should be set to match the‘greatest common factor’ of all the task intervals (see earlier).
2All tasks should have a duration less than the schedule tick interval, to ensure thatthe dispatcher is always free to call any task that is due to execute. Software simu-lation can often be used to measure the task duration.
3In order to meet Condition 2, all tasks must ‘timeout’ so that they cannot block
the scheduler under any circumstances. Note that this condition can often be metby incorporating, where necessary, a 
LOOP TIMEOUT [page 298] or a HARDWARE TIME -
OUT[page 305] in scheduled tasks. 
Please remember that this condition also applies to any functions called from
within a scheduled task, including any library code provided by your compilermanufacturer. In many cases, standard functions (like printf() ) do not include
timeout features. They must not be used in situations where predictability isrequired.
4The total time required to execute all the scheduled tasks must be less than theavailable processor time. Of course, the total processor time must include boththis ‘task time’ and the ‘scheduler time’ required to execute the scheduler updateand dispatcher operations. 
5Tasks should be scheduled so that they are never required to execute simultane-ously: that is, task overlaps should be minimized. Note that where alltasks are of a
duration much less than the scheduler tick interval, and that some task jitter canbe tolerated, this problem may not be significant.
Portability
A co-operative scheduler, like that described in this pattern, can be written entirely in‘C’ and need use only core 8051 hardware features. A scheduler created for one 8051family member may therefore be readily ported for use on any other 8051 device. 
The techniques described here may also be used without difficulty on other micro-
controllers.CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 279www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 305 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
The overall strengths and weaknesses of a co-operative scheduler may be summarized
as follows:
The scheduler is simple and can be implemented in a small amount of
code.
The applications based on the scheduler are inherently predictable, safe
and reliable.
The scheduler is written entirely in ‘C’: it is not a separate application, but
becomes part of the developer’s code.
The scheduler supports team working, since individual tasks can often be
developed largely independently and then assembled into the final system.
Obtain rapid responses to external events requires care at the design stage.The tasks cannot safely use interrupts: the only interrupt that should be active
in the application is the timer-related interrupt that drives the scheduler itself.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
For alternative solutions see:
GHYBRID SCHEDULER [page 333]
GONE-TASK SCHEDULER [page 911]
GONE-YEAR SCHEDULER [page 919]
GSTABLE SCHEDULER [page 932]
GChapter 13, for details of pre-emptive schedulers
Example: The core scheduler library (generic)
The schedulers in this book are all constructed using a library of core files, presented
here. Specified schedulers (designed for different hardware, clock frequencies and / ortick intervals) then add a small number of additional files on top of this core.
Most of the material in the core library has already been described earlier in this
chapter. The complete library is presented in Listings 14.12 and 14.13 to illustratehow the various components fit together.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH51.h (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see SCH51.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 280www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 306 ---
#ifndef _SCH51_H
#define _SCH51_H
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public data type declarations ----------------------------// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access 
// Total memory per task is 7 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a 'void (void)' function)void (code * pTask)(void); 
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay; 
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period; 
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe; } sTask; 
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------// Core scheduler functions
void SCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void);tByte SCH_Add_Task(void (code*) (void), const tWord, const tWord); bit SCH_Delete_Task(const tByte);void SCH_Report_Status(void);
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------// The maximum number of tasks required at any one time
// during the execution of the program//// MUST BE ADJUSTED FOR EACH NEW PROJECT#define SCH_MAX_TASKS (1) 
#endif/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.12 Part of the core scheduler libraryCO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 281www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 307 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH51.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THESE ARE THE CORE SCHEDULER FUNCTIONS ***--- These functions may be used with all 8051 devices ---
*** SCH_MAX_TASKS *must* be set by the user ***
--- see "Sch51.h" ---
*** Includes power-saving mode ***
--- You *MUST* confirm that the power-down mode is adapted ------ to match your chosen device (usually only necessary with --- Extended 8051s, such as c515c, c509, etc ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Sch51.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// The array of tasks
sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// Used to display the error code
// See Main.H for details of error codes// See Port.H for details of the error porttByte Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCH_Go_To_Sleep(void);// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// Keeps track of time since last error was recorded (see below)
static tWord Error_tick_count_G;
// The code of the last error (reset after ~1 minute)
static tByte Last_error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks()This is the 'dispatcher' function. When a task (function)
is due to run, SCH_Dispatch_Tasks() will run it.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 282www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 308 ---
This function must be called (repeatedly) from the main loop.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void) 
{tByte Index;
// Dispatches (runs) the next task (if one is ready)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe > 0) 
{(*SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)(); // Run the task
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe -= 1; // Reset / reduce RunMe flag// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a 'one shot' task, remove it from the arrayif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{SCH_Delete_Task(Index);}
}
}
// Report system status
SCH_Report_Status(); 
// The scheduler enters idle mode at this point 
SCH_Go_To_Sleep(); }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Add_Task()Causes a task (function) to be executed at regular intervals 
or after a user-defined delay
Fn_P   - The name of the function which is to be scheduled.
NOTE: All scheduled functions must be 'void, void' -that is, they must take no parameters, and have a void return type. 
DELAY  - The interval (TICKS) before the task is first executedPERIOD - If 'PERIOD' is 0, the function is only called once,
at the time determined by 'DELAY'. If PERIOD is non-zero,then the function is called repeatedly at an intervaldetermined by the value of PERIOD (see below for exampleswhich should help clarify this).CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 283www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 309 ---
RETURN VALUE: 
Returns the position in the task array at which the task has been 
added. If the return value is SCH_MAX_TASKS then the task could not be added to the array (there was insufficient space). If thereturn value is < SCH_MAX_TASKS, then the task was added successfully. 
Note: this return value may be required, if a task is
to be subsequently deleted - see SCH_Delete_Task().
EXAMPLES:
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed once after 1000 sch ticks. 
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,0,1000);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 sch ticks.
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,300,1000);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 ticks.
Task will be first executed at T = 300 ticks, then 1300, 2300, etc.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCH_Add_Task(void (code * pFunction)(), 
const tWord DELAY, const tWord PERIOD) 
{tByte Index = 0;
// First find a gap in the array (if there is one)
while ((SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask != 0) && (Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS))
{Index++;} 
// Have we reached the end of the list? 
if (Index == SCH_MAX_TASKS)
{// Task list is full//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS;
// Also return an error code
return SCH_MAX_TASKS; }SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 284www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 310 ---
// If we're here, there is a space in the task array
SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask = pFunction;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = DELAY;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period = PERIOD;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe = 0;return Index; // return position of task (to allow later deletion)
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Delete_Task()Removes a task from the scheduler. Note that this does
*not* delete the associated function from memory: it simply means that it is no longer called by the scheduler. 
TASK_INDEX - The task index. Provided by SCH_Add_Task(). RETURN VALUE: RETURN_ERROR or RETURN_NORMAL
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit SCH_Delete_Task(const tByte TASK_INDEX) 
{bit Return_code;
if (SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask == 0)
{// No task at this location...//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK;
// ...also return an error code
Return_code = RETURN_ERROR;}
else
{Return_code = RETURN_NORMAL;} 
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask   = 0x0000;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Delay   = 0;SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Period  = 0;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].RunMe   = 0;return Return_code; // return status
}CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 285www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 311 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Report_Status()Simple function to display error codes.This version displays code on a port with attached LEDs:
adapt, if required, to report errors over serial link, etc.
Errors are only displayed for a limited period 
(60000 ticks = 1 minute at 1ms tick interval).After this the the error code is reset to 0. 
This code may be easily adapted to display the last
error 'for ever': this may be appropriate in yourapplication.
See Chapter 10 for further information.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Report_Status(void)
{
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// ONLY APPLIES IF WE ARE REPORTING ERRORS// Check for a new error codeif (Error_code_G != Last_error_code_G)
{// Negative logic on LEDs assumedError_port = 255 - Error_code_G;
Last_error_code_G = Error_code_G;
if (Error_code_G != 0)
{Error_tick_count_G = 60000;}
else
{Error_tick_count_G = 0;}
}
else
{if (Error_tick_count_G != 0)
{if (--Error_tick_count_G == 0)
{SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 286www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 312 ---
Error_code_G = 0; // Reset error code
}
}
}
#endif
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Go_To_Sleep()This scheduler enters 'idle mode' between clock ticks
to save power. The next clock tick will return the processorto the normal operating state.
Note: a slight performance improvement is possible if this
function is implemented as a macro, or if the code here is simply pasted into the 'dispatch' function. 
However, by making this a function call, it becomes easier 
- during development - to assess the performance of the scheduler, using the 'performance analyser' in the Keil hardware simulator. See Chapter 14 for examples for this.  
*** May wish to disable this if using a watchdog ****** ADAPT AS REQUIRED FOR YOUR HARDWARE ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Go_To_Sleep()
{PCON |= 0x01; // Enter idle mode (generic 8051 version)
// Entering idle mode requires TWO consecutive instructions 
// on 80c515 / 80c505 - to avoid accidental triggering//PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (#1)//PCON |= 0x20;    // Enter idle mode (#2)}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.13 Part of the core scheduler libraryCO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 287www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 313 ---
Example: A generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with 
16-bit timing
This example demonstrates how the core scheduler files (presented in the previous
example) can be used as the basis of a complete scheduler. Here, Timer 2 is used togenerate the scheduler ‘ticks’.
Note that, because Timer 2 is used, this code cannot be used with the most basic
8051 devices which lack this timer: however, it will run on the great majority of cur-rent 8051s. Note also that other schedulers, using T0 and T1 for tick generation, areincluded on the CD.
The particular example here uses the scheduler to flash an LED on and off (on for
one second, off for one second) ad infinitum .
All the files are presented here (Listings 14.14 to 14.18), with the exception of the
core scheduler files presented in Listings 14.12 and 14.13. All the files, including thecore files, are included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration program for:
Generic 16-bit auto-reload scheduler (using T2).Assumes 12 MHz oscillator (-> 01 ms tick interval).*** All timing is in TICKS (not milliseconds) ***
Required linker options:
OVERLAY (main ~ (LED_Flash_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (LED_Flash_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h" #include "LED_flas.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Init();SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 288www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 314 ---
// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.14 Part of the library for a generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with 
16-bit timing
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See LED_flas.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------void LED_Flash_Init(void);
void LED_Flash_Update(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.15 Part of the library for a generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with
16-bit timing
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 289www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 315 ---
Simple 'Flash LED' test function for scheduler.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"#include "LED_flas.h"
// ------ Private variable definitions -----------------------------static bit LED_state_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must scheduleat 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Update(void)
{// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)if (LED_state_G == 1)
{LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}}SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 290www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 316 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.16 Part of the library for a generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with 
16-bit timing
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_01_12g.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A SCHEDULER FOR STANDARD 8051 / 8052 ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "2_01_12g.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.C)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function. Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 291www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 317 ---
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, // (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0; 
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04; // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00; // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x18; // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;   // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;   // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Update()This is the scheduler ISR. It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in the 'init' function.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 292www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 318 ---
This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:
timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. // NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1; // Inc. the 'RunMe' flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Repeat)
{// Schedule regular tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Repeat;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
} 
}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.17 Part of the library for a generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with 
16-bit timingCO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 293www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 319 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_01_12g.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A SCHEDULER FOR STANDARD 8051 / 8052 ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "2_01_12g.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.C)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function. Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, // (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0; 
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reloadSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 294www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 320 ---
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04; // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00; // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x18; // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Update()This is the scheduler ISR. It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in the 'init' function.
This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:
timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{tByte Index;CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 295www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 321 ---
TF2 = 0;  // Have to manually clear this. 
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1; // Inc. the 'RunMe' flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule regular tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
} 
}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 14.18 Part of the library for a generic scheduler for the 8051/52 with 
16-bit timing
Example: Further 8051 Schedulers
See CD for full details of a wide range of different 8051 schedulers.
Further reading
Please refer to p. 253 for a number of suitable suggestions for further reading in this
area.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 296www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 322 ---
Learning to think co-operatively
Introduction
Using a co-operative scheduler in your application has a number of benefits, one of
which being that the development process is simplified. However, to get the maxi-mum benefit from the scheduler you need to learn to think ‘co-operatively’. 
For example, one key difference between scheduled and desktop applications is the
need to think carefully about issues of timing and task duration. More specifically, aswe saw in Chapter 14, a key requirement in applications using a co-operative sched-uler is that – for all tasks, under all circumstances – the task duration, Duration
Task,
must satisfy the following condition:
DurationTask < Tick Interval
The patterns in this chapter are intended to help you meet this condition by ensur-
ing that tasks will abort if they cannot complete within a specified period of time.Specifically, two timeout patterns are presented here:
GLOOP TIMEOUT [page 298]
GHARDWARE TIMEOUT [page 305]chapter 15www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 323 ---
SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 298
LOOP TIMEOUT
Context
G You are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
G The application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you ensure that your system will not ‘hang’ while waiting for a hardwareoperation (such as an AD conversion or serial data transfer) to complete?
Background
The Philips 8XC552 is an Extended 8051 device with a number of on-chip peripher-als, including an 8-channel, 10-bit ADC. Philips provide an application note(AN93017) that describes how to use this microcontroller. This application noteincludes the following code:
// Wait until AD conversion finishes (checking ADCI)
while ((ADCON & ADCI) == 0); 
Such code is potentially unreliable, because there are circumstances under which
our application may ‘hang’. This might occur for one or more of the following reasons:
GIf the ADC has been incorrectly initialized, we cannot be sure that a data conver-sion will be carried out.
GIf the ADC has been subjected to an excessive input voltage, then it may notoperate at all.
GIf the variables ADCON or ADCI were not correctly initialized, they may not oper-ate as required.
Such problems are not, of course, unique to this particular microcontroller or even
to ADCs. Such code is common in embedded applications. 
If your application is to be reliable, you need to be able to guarantee that no func-
tion will hang in this way. Loop timeouts offer a simple but effective means ofproviding such a guarantee.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 324 ---
LOOP TIMEOUT 299
Solution
A loop timeout may be easily created. The basis of the code structure is a software
delay, created as follows:
unsigned integer Timeout_loop = 0;
...while (++Timeout_loop);
This loop will keep running until the variable Timeout_loop reaches its maxi-
mum value (assuming 16-bit integers) of 65,535 and then overflows. When thishappens, the program will continue. Note that, without some simulation studies orprototyping, we cannot easily determine how long this delay will be. However, we doknow that the loop will, eventually, time out.
Such a loop is not terribly useful. However, if we consider again the ADC example
given in ‘Background’, we can easily extend this idea. Recall that the original codewas as follows:
// Wait until AD conversion finishes (checking ADCI)
while ((ADCON & ADCI) == 0); 
Here is a modified version of this code, this time incorporating a loop timeout:
tWord Timeout_loop = 0;
// Take sample from ADC
// Wait until conversion finishes (checking ADCI)// - simple loop timeoutwhile (((ADCON & ADCI) == 0) && (++Timeout_loop != 0));
Note that this alternative implementation is also useful:
tWord Timeout_loop = 1;
// Take sample from ADC
// Wait until conversion finishes (checking ADCI)// - simple loop timeoutwhile (((ADCON & ADCI) == 0) && (Timeout_loop != 0))
{Timeout_loop++;  // Disable for use in hardware simulator...}
The advantage of this second technique is that the loop timeout may be easily
commented out, if required, when executing the code on a hardware simulator.
In both cases, we now know that the loop cannot go on ‘for ever’.Note that we can vary the duration of the loop timeout by changing the initial
value loaded into loop variable. The file TimeoutL.H , reproduced in Listing 15.1 and
included on the CD in the directory associated with this chapter, includes a set ofconstants that give, very approximately, the specified timeout values. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 325 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TimeoutL.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple loop timeout delays for the 8051 family based.* THESE VALUES ARE NOT PRECISE - YOU MUST ADAPT TO YOUR SYSTEM *
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------// Vary this value to change the loop duration
// THESE ARE APPROX VALUES FOR VARIOUS TIMEOUT DELAYS// ON 8051, 12 MHz, 12 Osc / cycle
// *** MUST BE FINE TUNED FOR YOUR APPLICATION ***// *** Timings vary with compiler optimization settings ***#define LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_001ms 65435
#define LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_010ms 64535#define LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_500ms 14535
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 15.1 The file TimeoutL.H.
We give an example of how to use this file in the following sections.
Hardware resource implications
LOOP TIMEOUT does not use a timer and imposes an almost negligible CPU and
memory load.
Reliability and safety implications
Using a LOOP TIMEOUT can result in a huge reliability and safety improvement at
minimal cost. However, if practical, HARDWARE TIMEOUT [page 305] is usually an even
better solution.
Portability
Loop timeouts will work in any environment. However, the timings obtained willvary dramatically between microcontrollers and compilers.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 300www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 326 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Much better than executing code without any form of timeout protection.
Many applications use a timer for RS232 baud rate generation, and another
timer to run the scheduler. In many 8051 devices, this leaves no furthertimers available to implement a
HARDWARE TIMEOUT [page 305]. In these
circumstances, use of a loop is the only practical way of implementingeffective timeout behaviour.
Timings are difficult to calculate and timer values are not portable. 
HARDWARE
TIMEOUT is always a better solution, if you have a spare timer available.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
As mentioned under ‘Reliability and safety implications’, HARDWARE TIMEOUT [page
305] is often a better alternative to LOOP TIMEOUT .
In addition, HARDWARE WATCHDOG [page 217] provides an alternative; however,
it is rather crude by comparison and detects errors at the application (rather thantask) level.
Example: Test program for loop timeout code
As noted, loop timeouts must be carefully hand-tuned to give accurate delay values.
The program in Listing 15.2 can be used to test such timeout code. 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C 
------------------------------------------------------------------
Testing timeout loops.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.H"
#include "TimeoutL.H"
// Function prototypes
void Test_1ms(void); void Test_10ms(void); void Test_500ms(void); 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{while(1) 
{Test_1ms();  LOOP TIMEOUT 301www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 327 ---
Test_10ms();  
Test_500ms();  }
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_1ms(void)
{tWord Timeout_loop = LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_001ms;
// Simple loop timeout...
while (++Timeout_loop != 0);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void Test_10ms(void)
{tWord Timeout_loop = LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_010ms;
// Simple loop timeout...
while (++Timeout_loop != 0);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_500ms(void)
{tWord Timeout_loop = LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_500ms;
// Simple loop timeout...
while (++Timeout_loop != 0);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 15.2 Testing the timeout code 
The program is run in the Keil hardware simulator to check the timings (Figure 15.1).SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 302
Remember: Changes in compiler optimization settings – and even apparently
unconnected changes to the rest of the program – can change these timings,because they alter the way in which the compiler makes use of the availablememory areas.  
For a final test in the pre-production code, set a port pin high at start of the time-
out and clear it at the end. Use an oscilloscope to measure the resulting delay.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 328 ---
Example: Loop timeouts in an I2C library
We discuss the I2C bus in detail in Chapter 23. Very briefly, I2C is a two-wire serial
bus. The two wires are referred to as the serial data (SDA) and serial clock (SCL) lines(Figure 15.2). When the bus is free, both SCL and SDA lines are HIGH. 
Here we consider how loop timeouts are used in a version of the I
2C library.
At certain stages in the data transmission, we need to ‘synchronize the clocks’. This
means waiting for the ‘clock’ line to be pulled high (by a slave device). Some I2C code
libraries include fragments of code similar to the following to achieve this:
// Synchronize the clock
while (_I2C_SCL == 0);   
Of course, for all of the reasons discussed in this pattern, this is a dangerous approach.LOOP TIMEOUT 303
FIGURE  15.1 Testing the timeout code using the Keil hardware simulator
FIGURE  15.2 The I2C busMicrocontroller
board
(l2C master)
Slave 1
SCL
SDA
Slave 2
Slave ...
Slave NRRVccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 329 ---
The following code fragment uses a loop timeout to improve this code with a 1 ms
timeout:
#define LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_001ms 65435
...tLong Timeout_loop = LOOP_TIMEOUT_INIT_001ms;  ...// Try to synchronize the clock
while ((_I2C_SCL == 0) && (++Timeout_loop));   
if (!Timeout_loop)
{return 1;  // Error - Timeout condition failed}
Please refer to Chapter 23 for further details of the I2C bus and this library.
Further reading
—SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 304www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 330 ---
HARDWARE TIMEOUT
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you produce well-defined timeout behaviour so that, for example, you canrespond within exactly 0.5 ms if an expected event does not occur?
Background
See LOOP TIMEOUT [page 298] for relevant background material.
Solution
As we saw in HARDWARE DELAY [page 194], we can create portable and easy to use
delay code for the 8051 family as follows:
// Define Timer 0 / Timer 1 reload values for ~1 msec delay
#define PRELOAD_01ms  (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 1000)))#define PRELOAD_01ms_H (PRELOAD_01ms / 256)#define PRELOAD_01ms_L  (PRELOAD_01ms % 256)//
...void Hardware_Delay_T0(const tLong MS)   
{tLong ms;
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer 
TMOD &= 0xF0;  // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01;  // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interruptsfor(ms = 0; ms < MS; ms++)
{                 // Note - delay value is *approximately* 1 ms per loop// - see Delay_T0.H for details of PRELOAD_values.HARDWARE TIMEOUT 305www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 331 ---
SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 306
TH0 = PRELOAD_01ms_H;  
TL0 = PRELOAD_01ms_L;
TF0 = 0; // clear overflow flag
TR0 = 1; // start timer 0
while (TF0 == 0); // Loop until Timer 0 overflows (TF0 == 1)TR0 = 0; // Stop Timer 0
}
}        
HARDWARE TIMEOUT involves a simple variation on this technique and allows
precise timeout delays to be easily generated.
For example, in LOOP TIMEOUT [page 298] we considered the process of reading
from an ADC in a Philips 8XC552 microcontroller.  
This was the original, potentially dangerous, code:
// Wait until AD conversion finishes (checking ADCI)
while ((ADCON & ADCI) == 0); 
This was a possible application of LOOP TIMEOUT to this problem:
tWord Timeout_loop = 0;
// Take sample from A-D
// Wait until AD conversion finishes (checking ADCI)// - simple loop timeoutwhile (((ADCON & ADCI) == 0) && (++Timeout_loop));
Applying LOOP TIMEOUT can result in a significant improvement in the reliability
of this code, but determining the duration of the timeout is not a trivial process.
Here is an alternative solution, providing a delay of 10 ms which will, with reason-
able accuracy, apply across the whole 8051 family (without code modifications):
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer 
TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = PRELOAD_10ms_H; // See Timeout.H for PRELOAD detailsTL0 = PRELOAD_10ms_L;TF0 = 0;  // Clear flagTR0 = 1;  // Start timer
while (((ADCON & ADCI) == 0) && !TF0);  
Various portable PRELOAD_ macros are given in the file Timeout.H reproduced in
Listing 15.3 and included on the CD. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 332 ---
Note that the same PRELOAD_ values may be used with either Timer 0 or Timer 1,
as required.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Timeout.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple timeout delays for the 8051 family based on T0/T1.Timer must be correctly configured to use these values:
See Chapter 11 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------
// Timer T_ values for use in simple (hardware) timeouts
// - Timers are 16-bit, manual reload ('one shot').//// NOTE: These macros are portable but timings are *approximate*//       and *must* be checked by hand if accurate timing is required.//// Define initial Timer 0 / Timer 1 values for ~50 µs delay#define T_50micros (65536 - (tWord)((OSC_FREQ / 26000)/(OSC_PER_INST)))   #define T_50micros_H (T_50micros / 256)#define T_50micros_L (T_50micros % 256)
// Define initial Timer 0 / Timer 1 values for ~500 µs delay
#define T_500micros (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 2000)))   #define T_500micros_H (T_500micros / 256)#define T_500micros_L (T_500micros % 256)
// Define initial Timer 0 / Timer 1 values for ~1 msec delay
#define T_01ms (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 1000)))    #define T_01ms_H (T_01ms / 256)#define T_01ms_L (T_01ms % 256)//// Define initial Timer 0 / Timer 1 values for ~10 msec delay#define T_10ms  (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 100)))    #define T_10ms_H (T_10ms / 256)#define T_10ms_L  (T_10ms % 256)//// Define initial Timer 0 / Timer 1 values for ~30 msec delay#define T_30ms  (65536 - (tWord)(OSC_FREQ / (OSC_PER_INST * 33)))    #define T_30ms_H (T_30ms / 256)#define T_30ms_L (T_30ms % 256)HARDWARE TIMEOUT 307www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 333 ---
SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 308
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 15.3 The file Timeout.H
Hardware resource implications
HARDWARE TIMEOUT requires the use of a timer.
Reliability and safety implications
HARDWARE TIMEOUT is the most reliable form of timeout structure we consider in
the book.
Portability
Like all timer-based patterns, this code may be easily ported to other members of the8051 family. It may also be ported to other microcontrollers.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Accurate timeout delays may be obtained using HARDWARE TIMEOUT .
The number of timers available is very limited: however, when using a co-
operative scheduler, the tasks are running co-operatively and the same timermay be used in several tasks at the same time.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See LOOP TIMEOUT [page 298] for an alternative that does not require the use of any
timer hardware.
In addition, HARDWARE WATCHDOG [page 217] provides an alternative; however,
it is rather crude by comparison and detects errors at the application (rather thantask) level.
Example: Testing hardware timeouts
Listing 15.4 illustrates the delays obtained with some hardware timeouts using theKeil hardware simulator (see also Figure 15.3).
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C 
------------------------------------------------------------------www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 334 ---
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 309
Testing timeout loops.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.H"
#include "TimeoutH.H"
// Function prototypes
void Test_50micros(void);  void Test_500micros(void);  void Test_1ms(void);  void Test_5ms(void);  void Test_10ms(void);  void Test_15ms(void);  void Test_20ms(void);  void Test_50ms(void);  
// TIMEOUT code variable & TIMEOUT code (dummy here)
#define TIMEOUT 0xFFtByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void main(void)
{while(1) 
{Test_50micros();  Test_500micros();  Test_1ms();  Test_5ms();  Test_10ms();  Test_15ms();  Test_20ms();  Test_50ms();  }
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_50micros(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interruptswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 335 ---
SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 310
// Simple timeout feature - approx 50 µs
TH0 = T_50micros_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_50micros_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_500micros(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 500 µs
TH0 = T_500micros_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_500micros_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 336 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_1ms(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 1 ms
TH0 = T_01ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_01ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_5ms(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = T_05ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_05ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTsHARDWARE TIMEOUT 311www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 337 ---
// (this test is for demo purposes here)
if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_10ms(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = T_10ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_10ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_15ms(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = T_15ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 312www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 338 ---
TL0 = T_15ms_L;
TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_20ms(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = T_20ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_20ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Test_50ms(void)
{HARDWARE TIMEOUT 313www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 339 ---
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer 
TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 10 ms
TH0 = T_50ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_50ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  // Normally need to report timeout TIMEOUTs
// (this test is for demo purposes here)if (TF0 == 1)
{// Operation timed outError_code_G = TIMEOUT;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 15.4 Testing the hardware timeouts
Example: Generating timeout-based delays
The ‘timeout’ technique may be readily extended to create an alternative implemen-
tation of HARDWARE DELAY [page 194]: see Listing 15.5.
void Delay_50micros(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 50 µs
TH0 = T_50micros_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 314www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 340 ---
TL0 = T_50micros_L;
TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  
}
Listing 15.5 Using hardware timeouts to implement delays
Further reading
—HARDWARE TIMEOUT 315
FIGURE  15.3 Testing the hardware timeouts in the Keil hardware simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 341 ---
Task-oriented design
Introduction
Two patterns in this chapter encapsulate key design characteristics that underlie
many successful co-operatively scheduled applications:
GMULTI -STAGE TASK [page 317] considers techniques that may be used to convert
long tasks (scheduled at infrequent intervals) into much shorter tasks (scheduled atfrequent intervals)
GMULTI -STATE TASK [Page 322] considers techniques that may be used to replace
multiple tasks with a single task that performs different activities depending on thecurrent state of the system.chapter 16www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 342 ---
MULTI -STAGE TASK
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you make sure that a long task does not interfere with the normal operationof the scheduler?
Background
See CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] for relevant background information.
Solution
As we have seen, co-operative schedulers have many advantages when compared topre-emptive or even hybrid schedulers and we generally wish to use a co-operativeapproach when it is feasible to do so. However, a key design challenge when usingthis approach is to ensure that each task is completed before the next scheduler tickoccurs. One approach that can help us to achieve this goal is to make use of timeouts(see Chapter 15).
Another approach is to use of multi-stage tasks. To understand the need for multi-
stage tasks, consider an example (adapted from Pont 1996,Chapter 13). Suppose thatas part of a ‘backup’ temperature monitoring system for a metal furnace we arerequired to send temperature samples at regular, 5-second, intervals to a desktop PC(Figure 16.1).
The required PC output takes the form shown in Figure 16.2.At first inspection, the obvious way of sending this information to the PC at the
required 5-second interval is to create a function (we will call it Send_Temp_Data() ),
which will be run by the scheduler every five seconds.
However, this is probably a rather bad solution. The problem is that we need to
send at least 43 characters to the PC using Send_Temp_Data() . At a common baud
rate of 9,600 (see Chapter 18 for details), each of the characters will take approxi-mately 1 millisecond to send: as a result, the task duration will be around 40 ms. Ifwe use this (long) task, we will need to set the system tick interval at a value greaterthan 40 ms, which may have a detrimental impact on the overall responsiveness ofthe application.MULTI-STAGE TASK 317www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 343 ---
The multi-stage alternative solution avoids this problem. Rather than sending all
the data at once, we can simply store the data we want to send to the PC in a buffer.Every ten milliseconds (say) we schedule a task to check the buffer and send the nextcharacter (if there is one ready to send). In this way, all the required 43 characters ofdata will be sent to the PC within 0.5 seconds: we can reduce this time if necessary (itrarely is) by scheduling the task to check the buffer every millisecond. Note thatSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 318
FIGURE  16.1 Part of the design for a temperature-monitoring systemTemperature
monitoring
system
Desktop
PCALARM (over
temperature)
System
parametersProcessed
temperature dataRaw temperature
dataCurrent operating
parametersMain furnace
controller
Temperature
sensorRaw sensor data
ALARM (under
temperature)Over
temperature
Under
temperature
FIGURE  16.2 Output from a temperature-monitoring systemTIME: 13.10.00 TEMPERATURE (Celsius): 2310
TIME: 13.10.05 TEMPERATURE (Celsius): 2313TIME: 13.10.10 TEMPERATURE (Celsius): 2317TIME: 13.10.15 TEMPERATURE (Celsius): 2318www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 344 ---
because we do not have to wait for each character to be sent, the process of sending
data from the buffer will be very fast (typically a fraction of a millisecond).
Overall, the use of multi-stage tasks in this application allows us the opportunity
to use a much shorter tick interval and therefore make more efficient use of themicrocontroller’s processing power.
The ‘RS232’ library used as an example here is discussed in detail in Chapter 18.
Hardware resource implications
In general, the use of multi-stage tasks allows much more efficient use of the availablemicrocontroller processing power.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of multi-stage tasks can make your system more responsive, by allowing the userof a shorter tick interval.
Portability
This technique can be (and is) applied in a wide range of different embedded systems.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
The use of multi-stage tasks allows the use of shorter tick intervals and,
hence, can help to make the system more responsive.
The use of multi-stage tasks allows much more efficient use of the available
microcontroller processing power.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
This basic architecture is applied in various patterns in this collection, including
PC LINK (RS-232 ) [page 362], LCD CHARACTER PANEL [page 467] and SWITCH INTER -
FACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399].
Example: Measuring rotational speed
Suppose we wish to measure the speed of a rotating shaft and display the results on a
(multiplexed) LED display. This could be part of an automotive or industrial application.
As we will see in Chapter 30, an effective way of measuring the speed is to attach
an appropriate rotary encoder to the shaft (Figure 16.3), and count the numberof pulses that occur over a fixed period of time (say 100 ms or 1 second). Fromthe count, and having details of the rotary encoder, we can calculate the averagespeed of rotation.MULTI-STAGE TASK 319www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 345 ---
We have seen various people try to apply this basic approach in a scheduled envi-
ronment as follows:
GCreate a task of (say) 100 ms duration 
GIn this task, count the pulses
GSet the value of a (global) Pulse_count_G variable at the end of the task
GUse the global variable to update the LED display
The problem with this approach is that 100 ms taken to measure the speed is a
long task duration and can be difficult to support in many embedded applications.
Here, for example, we suggested that we wished to display the speed on a multiplexedLED display. We might well have to update the LEDs every 5 ms to avoid flickering(see
MX LED DISPLAY [page 450] for details). 
Of course, a co-operative scheduler cannot support tasks called every 5 ms and
tasks of 100 ms duration.
To solve this problem, consider a multi-stage approach to this problem. In the first
approach, we waited in the task to count the pulses from the encoder. However, thisis not necessary. Timer 0 or Timer 1 (or Timer 2 where available) will count pulses(strictly, falling edges of pulses) on external pins without user intervention, withoutgenerating interrupts and without interfering with any other processing. We can usethis fact to make this speed measurement system into a multi-stage task as follows:
GCreate a very short (<0.1 ms task)
GSchedule this task (say every 100 ms, to be compatible with the first example)
GIn this task, read the current pulse count. Store the result in a global variable (foruse elsewhere in the program)
GReset the pulse count to 0
GRepeat 100 ms later etc.
The details of the technique will be considered in Chapter 30, where we will
see that it is possible for similar solutions to be created without the need for thetimer hardware. SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 320
FIGURE  16.3 Measuring rotational speedRotating
shaftTo ‘counter input’Optical
sensorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 346 ---
Example: LCD library
Suppose we wish to update an LCD display. As we will see in LCD CHARACTER PANEL
[page 467], updating each character in a typical LCD display can take around 0.5 ms:
to update the whole of a 40-character display can therefore take around 20 ms. This isoften prohibitively long. 
However, suppose we schedule a LCD_Update() function every 20 ms and, each
time, update only a single display position. At worst, it will take us a total of 800 msto update the whole display – and we will be able to complete numerous other tasksat the same time. In addition, in most circumstances, only some of the display willhave changed: if we keep track of characters that need to be updated, we can usuallykeep the display fully up to date with a multi-stage task of 0.5 ms duration calledevery 100 ms. Overall, the multi-stage approach to this single task can make a majordifference to the architecture of the whole application.
Full details of the multi-stage LCD library are given in 
LCD CHARACTER PANEL
[page 467].
Further reading
—MULTI-STAGE TASK 321www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 347 ---
MULTI -STATE TASK
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you replace multiple tasks in an application with a single task that performsdifferent activities depending on the current state of the system (and why is it, some-times, a good idea to do so)?
Background
See CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] and MULTI -STATE TASK [page 317] for
relevant background information.
Solution
MULTI -STATE TASK encapsulates a system architecture that is apparent in many well-
designed embedded applications. 
To understand the need for this architecture, consider a simple washing machine
control system (Figure 16.4).
Here is a brief description of the way in which we expect the system to operate:
1The user selects a wash program (e.g. ‘Wool’, ‘Cotton’) on the selector dial.
2The user presses the ‘Start’ switch. 
3The door lock is engaged.
4The water valve is opened to allow water into the wash drum.
5If the wash program involves detergent, the detergent hatch is opened. When thedetergent has been released, the detergent hatch is closed.
6When the ‘full water level’ is sensed, the water valve is closed.
7If the wash program involves warm water, the water heater is switched on. Whenthe water reaches the correct temperature, the water heater is switched off.
8The washer motor is turned on to rotate the drum. The motor then goes through aseries of movements, both forward and reverse (at various speeds) to wash theclothes. (The precise set of movements carried out depends on the wash programthat the user has selected.) At the end of the wash cycle, the motor is stopped.
9The pump is switched on to drain the drum. When the drum is empty, the pump
is switched off.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 322www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 348 ---
The description is simplified for the purposes of this example, but it will be ade-
quate for our purposes here. 
Based on this description we will try to identify some of the functions that will be
required to implement this system. A provisional list might be as shown in Figure 16.5.MULTI-STATE TASK 323
FIGURE  16.4 A possible context diagram for the control system in a domestic washing machineSelector
Dial
Washing
Machine
Control
System Water
Level
SensorStart
Switch
Temperature
SensorWater
ValveDoor
Lock
Drum
MotorStart switch
status
Water
temperatureWash program
setting
Water level
(PWM interface
assumed)Door lock
status
Water valve
statusWater valve
status
Motor
status
FIGURE  16.5 A provisional list of functions that could be used to develop a washing-machine control 
systemGRead_Selector_Dial() GControl_Detergent_Hatch()
GRead_Start_Switch() GControl_Door_Lock()
GRead_Water_Level() GControl_Motor()
GRead_Water_Temperature() GControl_Pump()
GControl_Water_Heater()
GControl_Water_Valve()www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 349 ---
Now, suppose we wish to identify the tasks to be scheduled (co-operatively) in
order to implement this application. Based on our list, it may be tempting to con-clude that each of the functions listed in Figure 16.5 should become a task in thesystem. While it would be possible to work in this way it would be likely to lead to acomplex and cumbersome system implementation. 
To see why this is so, take one example: the function Control_Water_Heater().
We want to heat the water only at particular times during the wash cycle. Therefore,if we want to treat this as a task and schedule it, say every 100 ms, we need tocreation an implementation something like the following:
void TASK_Control_Water_Heater(void)
{if (Switch_on_water_heater_G == 1)
{Water_heater = ON; return;}
// Switch off heater
Water_pin = OFF;}
What this task does when it is executed is to check a flag: if it is necessary to heat
the water, it starts to do so: otherwise, it stops the heating process.
There are two problems with creating the program in this way:
GWe are going to end up with large numbers of tasks (very large numbers in a moresubstantial application), most of which – like this task – actually do very little. Inapplications without external memory this is a particular problem, because eachtask will consume some of the limited memory (RAM) resources.
GIt is not at all clear which, if any, of these tasks will actually set the flag(Switch_on_water_heater_G ), or the other similar flags that will be required in
the other tasks in this application.
In practice, what we require in this and many similar applications is a single ‘System
Update’ task: this, as we will see, is a task that will be regularly scheduled and will, wherenecessary, call functions such as Control_Water_Heater() as and when required.
In the washing machine, this system update task will look something like the code
in Listing 16.1.
/*--------------------------------------------------------------- */
void WASHER_Update(void)
{static tWord Time_in_state;
switch (System_state_G)
{SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 324www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 350 ---
case START: 
{// For demo purposes onlyP1 = (tByte) System_state_G;
// Lock the door
WASHER_Control_Door_Lock(ON);
// Start filling the drum
WASHER_Control_Water_Valve(ON);
// Release the detergent (if any)
if (Detergent_G[Program_G] == 1)
{WASHER_Control_Detergent_Hatch(ON);}
// Ready to go to next state
System_state_G = FILL_DRUM;Time_in_state_G = 0;
break;
}
case FILL_DRUM: 
{// For demo purposes only P1 = (tByte) System_state_G;
// Remain in this state until drum is full
// NOTE: Timeout facility included hereif (++Time_in_state_G >= MAX_FILL_DURATION)
{// Should have filled the drum by now...System_state_G = ERROR;}
// Check the water levelif (WASHER_Read_Water_Level() == 1)
{// Drum is full
// Does the program require hot water?
if (Hot_Water_G[Program_G] == 1)
{WASHER_Control_Water_Heater(ON);MULTI-STATE TASK 325www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 351 ---
// Ready to go to next state
System_state_G = HEAT_WATER;Time_in_state_G = 0;}
else
{// Using cold water only// Ready to go to next stateSystem_state_G = WASH_01;Time_in_state_G = 0;}
}
break;}
case HEAT_WATER: 
{// For demo purposes onlyP1 = (tByte) System_state_G;
// Remain in this state until water is hot
// NOTE: Timeout facility included hereif (++Time_in_state_G >= MAX_WATER_HEAT_DURATION)
{// Should have warmed the water by now...System_state_G = ERROR;}
// Check the water temperature
if (WASHER_Read_Water_Temperature() == 1)
{// Water is at required temperature// Ready to go to next stateSystem_state_G = WASH_01;Time_in_state_G = 0;}
break;
}
case WASH_01: 
{// For demo purposes onlyP1 = (tByte) System_state_G;SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 326www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 352 ---
// All wash program involve WASH_01
// Drum is slowly rotated to ensure clothes are fully wetWASHER_Control_Motor(ON);
if (++Time_in_state >= WASH_01_DURATION)
{System_state_G = WASH_02;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
// REMAINING WASH PHASES OMITTED HERE ...case WASH_02: 
{// For demo purposes onlyP1 = (tByte) System_state_G;
break;
}
case ERROR: 
{// For demo purposes onlyP1 = (tByte) System_state_G;
break;
}
}
}
Listing 16.1 A possible implementation of the single task used to implement a 
washing-machine control system
Listing 16.1 is a representative example of a MULTI -STATE TASK . 
We can describe the simplest form of this architecture as follows:
GThe system involves the use of a number of different functions.
GThe functions are always called in the same sequence.
GThe functions are called from a single task, as required.
Note that variations on this theme are also common: for example, the functions
may not always be called in the same sequence: the precise sequence followed (andMULTI-STATE TASK 327www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 353 ---
the particular set of functions called) will frequently depend on user preferences or on
some other system inputs.
Hardware resource implications
This architecture makes very efficient use of system resources.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability or safety implications.
Portability
This high-level pattern is highly portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
MULTI -STAGE TASK encapsulates a simple architecture that matches the needs
of many embedded applications
Related patterns and alternative solutions
MULTI -STAGE TASK combined with ONE-TASK SCHEDULER [page 911] – and / or with
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER [page 919] provides a very simple and efficient system architec-
ture with minimal CPU, memory and power requirements.
Example: Traffic lights
Suppose we wish to create a system for driving three traffic light bulbs. The conventional‘red’, ‘amber’ and ‘green’ bulbs will be used, with the usual sequencing (Figure 16.6). 
Listing 16.2 shows how we can create a multi-state task to achieve this. The
‘Update’ function is intended to be scheduled every second.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 328
FIGURE  16.6 The required light sequence from red, amber and green bulbs in a traffic-light applica tionR
A
GR
A
GR
A
GR
A
GR
A
Gwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 354 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
T_lights.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Traffic light control program (Test Version 1.0)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "T_lights.h "
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Easy to change logic here
#define ON  0#define OFF 1
// Times in each of the (four) possible light states
// (Times are in seconds – must call the update task once per second)//#define RED_DURATION  (10)#define RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION  (10)
// NOTE: 
// GREEN_DURATION must equal RED_DURATION// AMBER_DURATION must equal RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION#define GREEN_DURATION RED_DURATION #define AMBER_DURATION RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// The state of the system
static eLight_State Light_state_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init()
Prepare for the scheduled traffic light activity.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init(const eLight_State START_STATE)
{Light_state_G = START_STATE; // Slave is Green; Master is Red}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-MULTI-STATE TASK 329www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 355 ---
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update()
Must be called once per second.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update(void)
{static tWord Time_in_state;
switch (Light_state_G)
{case Red: 
{Red_light = ON;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == RED_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = Red_and_Amber;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case Red_and_Amber: 
{Red_light = ON;Amber_light = ON;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = Green;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case Green: 
{Red_light = OFF;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = ON;SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 330www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 356 ---
if (++Time_in_state == GREEN_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = Amber;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case Amber: 
{Red_light = OFF;Amber_light = ON;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == AMBER_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = Red;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 16.2 Implementing a traffic-light control system using a single multi-state task
Further reading
—MULTI-STATE TASK 331www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 357 ---
Hybrid schedulers
Introduction
As we discussed in Chapter 13, co-operative schedulers provide a predictable platform
for a wide range of embedded applications. 
On some occasions, it can be necessary to incorporate some of the features of pre-
emptive schedulers into a co-operative scheduler framework, in a carefully controlledmanner. A hybrid scheduler seeks to achieve this.chapter 17www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 358 ---
HYBRID SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
G The application is to have a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create and use a hybrid scheduler?
Background
As we have seen, co-operative, time-triggered architectures have many advantageswhen we wish to develop embedded applications; indeed, throughout this book wehave argued that we would generally wish to use such an architecture when it is feasi-ble to do so. However, we have also taken a realistic view of the limitations of theco-operative scheduler; in particular we have acknowledged that in some circum-stances there can be a need to run both long tasks (e.g. 100 ms duration every 1,000ms) and one or more short frequent task (e.g. 0.1 ms duration every 1 ms); these tworequirements can conflict in a co-operative system, where – for all tasks, under all cir-cumstances – the task duration, Duration
Task, must satisfy the condition:
DurationTask  < Tick Interval
In this pattern collection we have already considered various ways of meeting the
need for both ‘frequent’ and ‘long’ tasks. For example, by using a faster processor (seeChapter 3) or a faster oscillator (Chapter 4) we can shorten the task durations.Alternatively, we can make use of timeouts (see Chapter 15) or develop one or moremulti-stage tasks (see Chapter 16). 
However, these solutions cannot always match our requirements and we will con-
sider two further, very powerful, solutions in this book:
GIn Part F, we will discuss the use of multiprocessor architectures. As we will see,using more than one microcontroller can provide a true multi-tasking capability.
GIn this chapter, we will discuss the creation and use of a hybrid scheduler.
We briefly introduced hybrid schedulers in Chaper 13. This architecture combines
the features of the pre-emptive and co-operative scheduler and allows (long) tasks tobe pre-empted, as we require. However, it does this in a controlled manner, and with-out the need to resort to complex context-switching code, or to complex mechanismsfor inter-task communication (see Figure 17.1)HYBRID SCHEDULER 333www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 359 ---
Solution
What we are trying to achieve
The form of hybrid scheduler described here differs from the (pure) co-operative
scheduler as follows:
GThe assumption that all tasks will complete between tick intervals is relaxed: one(or more) co-operative tasks may have a duration greater than the tick interval.
G Like the co-operative schedulers we have discussed any number of co-operative tasksmay be scheduled; however, in addition, onepre-emptive task may also be scheduled.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 334
FIGURE  17.1 Features of hybrid schedulersThe hybrid scheduler
GAhybrid scheduler provides limited multi-tasking capabilities
Operation:
GSupports any number of co-operatively scheduled tasks
GSupports a single pre-emptive task (which can interrupt the co-operative tasks)
Implementation:
GThe scheduler is simple and can be implemented in a small amount of code
GThe scheduler must allocate memory for two tasks at a time
GThe scheduler will generally be written entirely in a high-level language (such as ‘C’)
GThe scheduler is not a separate application; it becomes part of the developer’s code
Performance:
GRapid responses to external events can be obtained
Reliability and safety:
GWith careful design , can be as reliable as a (pure) co-operative scheduler
WARNING!
When you have created a co-operative scheduler (see Chapter 14), modifying it to
produce a hybrid scheduler involves only very minor code changes. We have seenmany instances where designers have used hybrid designs ‘because it was easy todo’. This is almost always a mistake.
In a hybrid scheduler the (purely) co-operative nature of the scheduling is lost.
This can have far-reaching implications for both the design process and, ulti-
mately, the system reliability. 
Refer to ‘Reliability and safety issues’ before attempting to use this scheduler!www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 360 ---
GThe pre-emptive task can pre-empt (interrupt) the co-operative tasks.
GThe pre-emptive task runs to completion once executed: that is, the pre-emptive
task cannot itself be interrupted by any of the co-operative tasks. The pre-emptivetask is best viewed as ‘top priority’ task. 
Also note the following:
GThe fact that there is only one pre-emptive task, and that it runs to completion,
greatly simplifies the system architecture compared to a fully pre-emptive solution.In particular, we do not need to implement a context switch mechanism. Thismeans (a) that the architecture is still very simple, and (b) that the operating envi-ronment can still be implemented, entirely, in ‘C’.
GThe fact that the pre-emptive task runs to completion also simplifies the inter-taskcommunication compared with a fully pre-emptive environment: we provide fur-ther details later.
GOnly a short task (with a maximum duration of around 50% of the tick interval –preferably much less) should be run pre-emptively, otherwise overall system per-formance will be impaired.
How we achieve it
To see how we can create a hybrid scheduler, we begin by reviewing the implementa-tion of the co-operative scheduler.
Listing 17.1 shows the ‘update’ function from a co-operative scheduler.
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. // NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Task_p)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1; // Incr. the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule regular tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;HYBRID SCHEDULER 335www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 361 ---
}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
} 
}
}
Listing 17.1 The ‘update’ function from a co-operative scheduler
The co-operative version assumes a scheduler data type of the type illustrated in
Listing 17.2.
// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access 
// Total memory per task is 7 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a ‘void (void)’ function)void (code * Task_p)(void); 
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay; 
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period; 
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe; } sTask;
Listing 17.2 The user-defined data type used in the co-operative scheduler
Listing 17.3 shows the ‘update’ function for a hybrid scheduler.
void hSCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this.// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < hSCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 336www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 362 ---
{
// Check if there is a task at this locationif (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (hSCH_task_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to run//if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Co_op)
{// If it is a co-operative task, increment the RunMe flag
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;}
else
{// If it is a pre-emptive task, run it IMMEDIATELY
(*hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask) ();  // Run the task
hSCH_task_G[Index].RunMe -= 1;     // Reset / reduce
RunMe flag
// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a 'one shot' task, remove it from the array
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask  = 0;}
}
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule regular tasks to run againhSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delayhSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}
Listing 17.3 The ‘update’ function from a hybrid schedulerHYBRID SCHEDULER 337www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 363 ---
The hybrid version assumes a scheduler data type as shown in Listing 17.4.
// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access 
// Total memory per task is 8 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a ‘void (void)’ function)void (code * Task_p)(void); 
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay; 
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period; 
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe; 
// Set to 1 if task is co-operative
// Set to 0 if task is pre-emptive
tByte Co_op;
} sTask;
Listing 17.4 The user-defined data type used in the hybrid scheduler
To set the Co_op field to an appropriate value an additional parameter is required in
the SCH_Add_Task() function call (Figure 17.2).
Reliability and safety issues
Problems with multi-tasking (pre-emptive) systems
In Chapter 13 we discussed the problems with pre-emptive schedulers, including the
issues associated with critical sections of code. As we saw, to deal with critical sectionsof code in a fully pre-emptive system, we have two main possibilities:
G‘Pause’ the scheduling by disabling the scheduler interrupt before beginning thecritical section; re-enable the scheduler interrupt when we leave the critical section.
GUse a ‘lock’ (or some other form of ‘semaphore mechanism’) to achieve asimilar result. SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 338
Please read this section carefully before attempting to use this scheduler!www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 364 ---
In Chapter 13, we saw that both of these solutions had drawbacks. In particular, we
saw that problems occur with the second solution if a task is interrupted after it readsthe lock flag (and finds it unlocked) and before it sets the flag (to indicate that theresource is in use)(see Figure 17.3).
The problem does not occur in a hybrid scheduler, for the following reasons:
GIn the case of pre-emptive tasks – because they cannot be interrupted – the ‘inter-rupt between check and lock’ situation cannot arise.HYBRID SCHEDULER 339
FIGURE  17.2 The parameters of the ‘Add Task’ function. [Top] The co-operative version. [Bottom] The
hybrid versionPeriod
the interval (in ticks)
between repeatedexecutions of the task.If set to 0, the task isexecuted only onceTask_Namethe name of thefunction (task) thatyou wish to scheduleInitial_Delaythe delay (in ticks)
before task is firstexecuted. If set to 0,the task is executedimmediately
Sch_Add_Task ( Task_Name , Initial_Delay , Period);
Period
the interval (in ticks)between repeatedexecutions of the task.If set to 0, the task isexecuted only onceTask_Namethe name of thefunction (task) thatyou wish to scheduleInitial_Delaythe delay (in ticks)before task is firstexecuted. If set to 0,the task is executedimmediately
hSCH_Add_Task (Task_Name,    Initial_Delay,    Period,    Co_op);Co_op
set to '1' if the task isco-operative
set to '0' if the task is
pre-emptivewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 365 ---
GIn the case of co-operative tasks (which can be interrupted), the problem again
cannot occur, for slightly different reasons. 
Co-operative tasks can be interrupted ‘between check and lock’, but only by a
pre-emptive task. If the pre-emptive task interrupts and finds that a critical sectionis unlocked, it will set the lock,
3use the resource, then clear the lock: that is, it will
run to completion. The co-operative task will then resume and will find the
system in the same state that it was in before the pre-emptive task interrupted :
as a result, there can be no breach of the mutual exclusion rule.
Note that the hybrid scheduler solves the problem of access to critical sections of
code in a simple way: unlike the complete pre-emptive scheduler, we do not requirethe creation of complex code ‘lock’ or ‘semaphore’ structures.
The safest way to use the hybrid scheduler
The most reliable way to use the hybrid scheduler is as follows:
GCreate as many co-operative tasks as you require. It is likely that you will be using ahybrid scheduler because one or more of these tasks may have a duration greaterthan the tick interval; this can be done safely with a hybrid scheduler, but youmust ensure that the tasks do not overlap.
GImplement one pre-emptive task; typically (but not necessarily) this will be called
at every tick interval. A good use of this task is, for example, to check for errors oremergency conditions: this task can thereby be used to ensure that your system isable to respond within (say) 10 ms to an external event, even if its main purpose isto run (say) a 1,000 ms co-operative task.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 340
FIGURE  17.3 The problems caused in a pre-emptive environment if a context switch occurs between
‘check and ‘set’Problems arise if we have a context switch here
(between 'check' and 'set')// ...
// Ready to enter critical section// - Check lock is clearif (Lock == LOCKED)   {   return:   }
// Lock is clear
// Enter critical section
// Set the lock
Lock = LOCKED:
// CRITICAL CODE HERE //
3. Strictly, setting the lock flag is not necessary, as no interruption is possible.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 366 ---
GRemember that the pre-emptive task(s) can interrupt the co-operative tasks. If there
are critical code sections, you need to implement a simple lock mechanism (the
following example will illustrate this in detail).
GThe pre-emptive task must be short (with a maximum duration of around 50% of
the tick interval – preferably much less), otherwise overall system performance willbe greatly impaired.
GTest the application carefully, under a full range of operating conditions, andmonitor for errors.
Portability
The HYBRID SCHEDULER is as portable as the CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255]. It
does not require the use of assembly code or other non-standard language features.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
The overall strengths and weaknesses of HYBRID SCHEDULER may be summarized
as follows:
Has the ability to deal with both ‘long infrequent tasks’ and a single ‘short
frequent task’ that cannot be provided by a pure CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
[page 255] .
Is safe and predictable, if used according to the guidelines.It must be handled with caution.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
GSee CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255]
GSee SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609]
GSee SCC SCHEDULER [page 677]
Example: Hybrid scheduler using T2 (1 ms ticks)
A complete example of a hybrid scheduler is given in this section (Listings 17.5
to 17.12).
Note the use of a simple locking mechanism to ensure that only one task accesses
the LED port at any particular time.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project 2_01_12hHYBRID SCHEDULER 341www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 367 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ LED_hyb.C ------------------------------------------------
// Two tasks share this port (P2)
// We will treat it as a shared resource, and ‘lock’ itsbit LED_short_pin = P2^2;
#define LED_long_port P2
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.5 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration program for:/// HYBRID SCHEDULER ///Generic 16-bit auto-reload hybrid scheduler (using T2).Assumes 12 MHz oscillator (-> 01 ms tick interval).*** All timing is in TICKS (not milliseconds) ***
Required linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):
OVERLAY (main ~ (LED_Short_Update, LED_Long_Update),
hSCH_dispatch_tasks ! (LED_Short_Update, LED_Long_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 342www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 368 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12h.h" #include "LED_Hyb.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerhSCH_Init_T2();
LED_Short_Init();// Add the 'short' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// THIS IS A PRE-EMPTIVE TASKhSCH_Add_Task(LED_Short_Update, 0, 1000, 0);
// Add the 'long' task (duration 10 seconds)
// THIS IS A CO-OPERATIVE TASKhSCH_Add_Task(LED_Long_Update, 0, 20000, 1);
// Start the scheduler
hSCH_Start();
while(1)
{hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.6 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_01_12h.h (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see 2_01_12h.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "hSCH51.H"
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------HYBRID SCHEDULER 343www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 369 ---
void hSCH_Init_T2(void);
void hSCH_Start(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.7 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_01_12h.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A *HYBRID* SCHEDULER FOR STANDARD 8051 / 8052 ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "2_01_12h.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.C)
extern sTaskH hSCH_tasks_G[hSCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable
//// See Main.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function. Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.
Must call this function before using the scheduler. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < hSCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 344www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 370 ---
hSCH_Delete_Task(i);
}
// Reset the global error variable
// - hSCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0; 
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)
// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04; // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00; // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x18; // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18; // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2 = 1; // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2 = 1; // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_UpdateHYBRID SCHEDULER 345www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 371 ---
This is the scheduler ISR. It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in hSCH_Init().This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. // NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < hSCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{
// Check if there is a task at this location
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to run// if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Co_op)
{
// If it is a co-operative task, increment the RunMe flag
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1; }
else
{// If it is a pre-emptive task, run it IMMEDIATELY(*hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)();  // Run the task
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe -= 1;   // Reset / reduce
RunMe flag
// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a ‘one shot’ task, remove it from the  
array
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask  = 0;}
}
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule regular tasks to run againSINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 346www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 372 ---
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;
}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
} 
}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.8 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH51.h (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see hSCH51.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#ifndef _hSCH51_H
#define _hSCH51_H
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public data type declarations ----------------------------// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access 
// Total memory per task is 8 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a ‘void (void)’ function)void (code * pTask)(void); 
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay; 
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period; HYBRID SCHEDULER 347www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 373 ---
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe; 
// Set to 1 if task is co-operative
// Set to 0 if task is pre-emptivetByte Co_op; } sTaskH; 
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------// Core scheduler functions
void hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void);tByte hSCH_Add_Task(void (code *)(void), tWord, tWord, bit); bit hSCH_Delete_Task(tByte);void hSCH_Report_Status(void);
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------
// The maximum number of tasks required at any one time
// during the execution of the program//// MUST BE ADJUSTED FOR EACH NEW PROJECT#define hSCH_MAX_TASKS (2) 
#endif/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.9 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH51.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
/// HYBRID SCHEDULER CORE ///
*** THESE ARE THE CORE SCHEDULER FUNCTIONS ***
--- These functions may be used with all 8051 devices ---
*** hSCH_MAX_TASKS *must* be set by the user ***
--- see "Sch51.h" ---
*** Includes power-saving mode ***
--- You *MUST* confirm that the power-down mode is adapted ------ to match your chosen device (usually only necessary with --- Extended 8051s, such as c515c, c509, etc ---SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 348www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 374 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "hSch51.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// The array of tasks
sTaskH hSCH_tasks_G[hSCH_MAX_TASKS];
// Used to display the error code
// See Main.H for details of error codes// See ‘Private Constants’ (below) for details of the error port// - refer to book for further details (Chapter 14)tByte Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void hSCH_Go_To_Sleep(void);// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// Keeps track of time since last error was recorded (see below)
static tWord Error_tick_count_G;
// The code of the last error (reset after ~1 minute)
static tByte Last_error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks()This is the ‘dispatcher’ function. When a task (function)
is due to run, hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks() will run it.This function must be called (repeatedly) from the main loop.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void) 
{tByte Index;
// Dispatches (runs) the next task (if one is ready)
for (Index = 0; Index < hSCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Only dispatching co-operative tasksif ((hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Co_op) && (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe > 0)) 
{(*hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)();  // Run the taskHYBRID SCHEDULER 349www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 375 ---
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe -= 1;   // Reset / reduce RunMe flag
// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a ‘one shot’ task, remove it from the arrayif (hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{// Faster than call to delete taskhSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask = 0;}
}
}
// Report system statushSCH_Report_Status(); 
// The scheduler enters idle mode at this point 
hSCH_Go_To_Sleep(); }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Add_Task()Causes a task (function) to be executed at regular intervals 
or after a user-defined delay
Fn_P - The name of the function which is to be scheduled.
NOTE: All scheduled functions must be 'void, void' -that is, they must take no parameters, and have a void return type. 
Del - The interval (TICKS) before the task is first executedPer - If 'Per' is 0, the function is only called once,
at the time determined by 'Del'. If Per is non-zero,then the function is called repeatedly at an intervaldetermined by the value of Per (see below for examplesthat should help clarify this).
Co-op - Set to 1 if it a co-op task; 0 if pre-emptiveRETN:
The position in the task array at which the task has been added.
If the return value is hSCH_MAX_TASKS then the task could not be
added to the array (there was insufficient space). If thereturn value is < hSCH_MAX_TASKS, then the task was added successfully. 
Note: this return value may be required, if a task is
to be subsequently deleted - see hSCH_Delete_Task().SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 350www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 376 ---
EXAMPLES:
Task_ID = hSCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0,0);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed once after 1000 ticks.(Pre-emptive task) 
Task_ID = hSCH_Add_Task(Do_X,0,1000,1);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 ticks. (co-operative task) 
Task_ID = hSCH_Add_Task(Do_X,300,1000,0);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 ticks.Task will be first executed at T = 300 ticks, then 1300, 2300, etc. (Pre-emptive task) 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte hSCH_Add_Task(void (code* Fn_p)(), // Task function pointer
tWord   Del,    // Num ticks 'til task first runs tWord   Per,    // Num ticks between repeat runsbit     Co_op)  // Co_op / pre_emp
{tByte Index = 0;
// First find a gap in the array (if there is one)
while ((hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask != 0) && (Index < hSCH_MAX_TASKS))
{Index++;} 
// Have we reached the end of the list? 
if (Index == hSCH_MAX_TASKS)
{// Task list is full//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS;
// Also return an error code
return hSCH_MAX_TASKS; }
// If we’re here, there is a space in the task array
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask = Fn_p;
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = Del;
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Period = Per;
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].Co_op = Co_op;HYBRID SCHEDULER 351www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 377 ---
hSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe = 0;
return Index; // return position of task (to allow later deletion)
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Delete_Task()
Removes a task from the scheduler. Note that this does
*not* delete the associated function from memory: it simply means that it is no longer called by the scheduler. 
PARAMS: Task_index - The task index. Provided by hSCH_Add_Task(). RETURNS: RETURN_ERROR or RETURN_NORMAL
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit hSCH_Delete_Task(tByte Task_index) 
{bit Return_code;
if (hSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].pTask == 0)
{// No task at this location...//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK;
// ...also return an error code
Return_code = RETURN_ERROR;}
else
{Return_code = RETURN_NORMAL;} 
hSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].pTask  = 0;
hSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay   = 0;hSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Period  = 0;
hSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].RunMe   = 0;return Return_code;       // return status
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Report_Status()Simple function to display error codes.SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 352www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 378 ---
This version displays code on a port with attached LEDs:
adapt, if required, to report errors over serial link, etc.
Errors are only displayed for a limited period 
(60000 ticks = 1 minute at 1 ms tick interval).After this the the error code is reset to 0. 
This code may be easily adapted to display the last
error 'for ever': this may be appropriate in yourapplication.
See Chapter 14 for further information.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Report_Status(void)
{
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// ONLY APPLIES IF WE ARE REPORTING ERRORS// Check for a new error codeif (Error_code_G != Last_error_code_G)
{// Negative logic on LEDs assumedError_port = 255 - Error_code_G;
Last_error_code_G = Error_code_G;if (Error_code_G != 0)
{Error_tick_count_G = 60000;}
else
{Error_tick_count_G = 0;}
}
else
{if (Error_tick_count_G != 0)
{if (--Error_tick_count_G == 0)
{Error_code_G = 0; // Reset error code}
}
}HYBRID SCHEDULER 353www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 379 ---
#endif
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
hSCH_Go_To_Sleep()This scheduler enters ‘idle mode’ between clock ticks
to save power. The next clock tick will return the processorto the normal operating state.
Note: a slight performance improvement is possible if this
function is implemented as a macro, or if the code here is simply pasted into the ‘dispatch’ function. 
However, by making this a function call, it becomes easier 
- during development - to assess the performance of the scheduler, using the ‘performance analyser’ in the Keil hardware simulator. See Chapter 14 for examples for this.  
*** May wish to disable this if using a watchdog ****** ADAPT AS REQUIRED FOR YOUR HARDWARE ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void hSCH_Go_To_Sleep()
{PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (generic 8051 version)
// Entering idle mode requires TWO consecutive instructions 
// on 80c515 / 80c505 - to avoid accidental triggering//PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (#1)//PCON |= 0x20;    // Enter idle mode (#2)}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.10 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Hyb.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See LED_Hyb.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 354www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 380 ---
// ------ P ic function prototypes -------------------------------
void LED_Short_Init(void);
void LED_Short_Update(void);void LED_Long_Update(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.11 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Hyb.C (v1.0)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple ‘Flash LED’ test function for HYBRID scheduler.*** With lock mechanism ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.H"
#include "LED_Hyb.h"
#include "Delay_T0.h"
// ------ Private constants -----------------------------------------// For the lock mechanism
#define LOCKED 1#define UNLOCKED 0
// ------ Private variable definitions ------------------------------static bit LED_short_state_G;// The lock flag
static bit LED_lock_G = UNLOCKED;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Init()- Prepare to flash LEDs.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Short_Init(void)
{HYBRID SCHEDULER 355www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 381 ---
LED_short_state_G = 0;
LED_long_port = 0xAA;LED_lock_G = UNLOCKED;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Short_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must scheduleat 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Short_Update(void)
{// The port has a lock// If it is locked, we simply returnif (LED_lock_G == LOCKED)
{return;}
// Port is free - lock it
LED_lock_G = LOCKED;
// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)
if (LED_short_state_G == 1)
{LED_short_state_G = 0;LED_short_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_short_state_G = 1;LED_short_pin = 1;}
// Unlock the port
LED_lock_G = UNLOCKED;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Long_Update()SINGLE-PROCESSOR SYSTEMS 356www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 382 ---
Demo 'long' task (10 second duration).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Long_Update(void)
{tByte i;
// The port has a lock
// If it is locked, we simply returnif (LED_lock_G == LOCKED)
{return;}
// Port is free - lock it
LED_lock_G = LOCKED;
for (i = 0; i < 5; i++)
{LED_long_port = 0x0F;Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);LED_long_port = 0xF0;Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);}
// Unlock the portLED_lock_G = UNLOCKED;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 17.12 Part of a hybrid scheduler example
Example: Further hybrid schedulers
Please see Chapter 34 for examples of the use of hybrid schedulers in speech-processing
applications.
Further reading
Please refer to page 253 for a number of suitable suggestions for further reading inthis area.HYBRID SCHEDULER 357www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 383 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 384 ---
The user interface
In this part, we will consider some key patterns suitable for assisting in the creation of user
interfaces for a wide range of embedded applications.
In Chapter 18, we present PC LINK (RS-232) [page 364]. This pattern considers how,
using the universal ‘RS-232’ standard, we can transfer data between an embedded deviceand a desktop, notebook or similar PC. In addition to being a useful pattern in its ownright, this pattern illustrates many of the features required in software developed for a co-operatively scheduled environment.
In Chapter 19, we will explore techniques for reading inputs from switches: here we will
be concerned with both software-only and hardware-based interfaces. In Chapter 20, wewill see how the same basic techniques may be extended to work efficiently with keypads.
In Chapter 21, we turn our attention to the creation of LED displays. In particular, we will
be concerned with multiplexed LED interfaces, which are the only cost-effective solution inmost applications.
Finally, in Chapter 22, we will consider how to control LCD (text) displays. In this chapter
we will be specifically concerned with the interaction with displays based on the ubiqui-tous Hitachi HD44780 LCD controller chip.part dwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 385 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 386 ---
Communicating with PCs via RS-232
Introduction
In this chapter we present PC LINK (RS-232) . This pattern describes how, using the
universal ‘RS-232’ standard, we can transfer data between an embedded device and adesktop, notebook or similar PC. chapter 18
Note : We are not concerned here with the process of transferring data between
two (or more) microcontrollers: this is discussed in Part F.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 387 ---
PC LINK (RS-232)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you link your embedded application to a desktop (or notebook or hand-held)PC using ‘RS-232’?
Background
This pattern is concerned with the use of what is commonly referred to as the RS-232communication protocol, to transfer data between an 8051 microcontroller and someform of personal computer (PC, notebook or similar).
We provide some important background information on RS-232 in this section. We
begin, however, by considering some important terminology used in the communica-tions area.
What are ‘simplex’, ‘half-duplex’ and ‘duplex’ serial communications?
In a simplex serial communication system, we typically require at least two wires
(’signal’ and ‘ground’). Data transfer is only in one direction: for example, we mighttransfer data from a simple data-monitoring system to a PC using simplex data transfer.
In a half-duplex serial communication system we again (typically) require at least
two wires. Here, data transfer can be in both directions. However, transmission canonly be in one direction at a time. In a variation of the data-monitoring example, wemight use a half-duplex communication strategy to allow us to send information tothe embedded module (to set parameters, such as sampling rate). We might also, atother times, use the same link to download the data from the embedded board to a PC.
In a full-duplex serial communication system, we typically require at least three
wires (Signal A, Signal B, Ground). The line Signal A will carry data in one direction at
the same time that Signal B carries data in the other direction.
What is ‘RS-232’?
In 1997 the Telecommunications Industry Association released what is formally
known as TIA-232 Version F, a serial communication protocol which has beenTHE USER INTERFACE 362www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 388 ---
universally referred to as ‘RS-232’ since its first ‘Recommended Standard’ appeared in the
1960s. Similar standards (V.28) are published by the International TelecommunicationsUnion (ITU) and by CCITT (Consultative Committee International Telegraphand Telephone).
The ‘RS-232’ standard includes details of:
GThe protocol to be used for data transmission.
GThe voltages to be used on the signal lines.
G The connectors to be used to link equipment together.
Overall, the standard is comprehensive and widely used, at data transfer rates of
up to around 115 or 330 kbits / second (115 / 330 k baud). Data transfer can be overdistances of 15 metres or more.
Note that RS-232 is a peer-to-peer communication standard. Unlike the multi-drop
RS-485 standard (which we consider in Chapter 27), RS-232 is intended to link onlytwo devices together. 
Basic RS-232 protocol
RS-232 is a character-oriented protocol. That is, it is intended to be used to sendsingle 8-bit blocks of data. To transmit a byte of data over an RS-232 link, we gener-ally encode the information as follows:
GWe send a ‘Start’ bit.
GWe send the data (8 bits).
GWe send a ‘Stop’ bit (or bits).
We consider each of these stages here.
Quiescent state
When no data are being sent on an RS-232 ‘transmit’ line, the line is held at a
Logic 1 level. 
Start bit
To indicate the start of a data transmission we pull the ‘transmit’ line low.
Data
Data are often encoded in ASCII (American Standard Code for InformationInterchange), in 7-bit form. The bits are sent least significant bit first. If we are send-ing 7-bit data, the eighth data bit is often used as a simple parity check bit and istransmitted in order to provide a rudimentary error detection facility on a character-by-character basis. 
Note that none of the code presented here uses parity bits: we use all 8 bits for
data transfer.PC LINK (RS–232) 363www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 389 ---
Stop bit(s)
The stop bits consist of a Logic 1 output. These can be 1 or, less commonly, 1 Gor 2
pulses wide. 
Note that we will use a single stop bit in all code example.
Asynchronous data transmission and baud rates
RS-232 uses an asynchronous protocol. This means that no clock signal is sent withthe data. Instead, both ends of the communication link have an internal clock, run-ning at the same rate. The data (in the case of RS-232, the ‘Start’ bit) is then used tosynchronize the clocks, if necessary, to ensure successful data transfer.
RS-232 generally operates at one of a (restricted) range of baud rates. Typically
these are: 75, 110, 300, 1,200, 2,400, 4,800, 9,600, 14,400, 19,200, 28,800, 33,600,56,000, 115,000 and (rarely) 330,000 baud. Of these, 9,600 baud is a very ‘safe’choice, as it is very widely supported.
RS-232 voltage levels
The threshold levels used by the receiver are +3V and -3V and the lines are inverted.The maximum voltage allowed is +/- 15V. 
Note that these voltages cannot be obtained directly from the naked microcon-
troller port pins: some form of interface hardware is required. For example, theMaxim Max232 and Max233 are popular and widely used line driver chips; we con-sider how to use such chips in ‘Solution’.
Flow control
RS-232 is often used with some form of flow control. This is a protocol, implementedthrough software or hardware, that allows a receiver of data to tell the transmitter topause the dataflow. This might be necessary, for example, if we were sending data to aPC and the PC had filled a RAM buffer: the PC would then tell our embedded applica-tion to pause the data transfer until the buffer contents had been stored on disk.
Although hardware handshaking can be used, this requires extra signal lines. The
most common flow control technique is ‘Xon / Xoff’ control. This requires a half- orfull-duplex communication link, and can operate as follows:
1Transmitter sends a byte of data.
2The receiver is able to receive more data: it does nothing.
3The transmitter sends another byte of data.
4Steps 1–3 continue until the receiver cannot accept any more data: it then sends a‘Control s’ (Xoff) character back to the transmitter.
5The transmitter receives the ‘Xoff’ command and pauses the data transmission.THE USER INTERFACE 364www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 390 ---
6When the receiver node is ready for more data, it sends a ‘Control q’ (Xon) charac-
ter to the transmitter.
7The transmitter resumes the data transmission.
8The process continues from Step 1.
Solution
In this section we consider how to implement an RS-232 link from an embedded
8051 microcontroller to a PC.
Transceiver hardware
As noted in ‘Background’, the voltages used in RS-232 communications are incompat-ible with the voltages used on the microcontroller itself. Therefore, you will requiresome form of voltage level conversion circuitry between the microcontroller boardand the PC cable.
Usually the most cost-effective way of achieving this is to use a ‘transceiver’
(transmitter-receiver) chip created for this purpose. Of these, the Max232 (fromMaxim) is frequently used; however, in new designs the more recent Max233 is abetter choice as it requires fewer external components.
The required link to a Max233 is illustrated in Figure 18.1, which also shows the
standard connections (9-pin D-type socket: ‘DB-9’) used for most recent designs.
Cable connections
To connect to the PC using the software presented here, you need a 3-wire cable. 
Use DB-9 socket (‘female’) connector at the PC end and DB-9 plug (‘male’) connec-
tor at the microcontroller end.
The required cable connections are a ‘straight through’ cable as described in Table 18.1.PC LINK (RS–232) 365
FIGURE  18.1 Using a Max233 as an RS-232 transceiver1
6 95
Max
233Vcc
1.0 µF
To Tx pin (P3.1)
To Rx pin (P3.0)19
18 1
20
6,97
TxRx
Connect together:
Pins 12 and 17Pins 11 and 15Pins 16 and 10www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 391 ---
The software architecture
Suppose we wish to transfer data to a PC at a standard 9,600 baud rate; that is, 9,600
bits per second. As we discussed in ‘Background’, transmitting each byte of data, plusstop and start bits, involves the transmission of ten bits of information (assuming asingle stop bit is used). As a result, each byte takes approximately 1 ms to transmit.
This has important implications in all applications, not least those using a sched-
uler. If, for example, we wish to send this information to the PC:
Current core temperature is 36.678 degrees
then the task sending these 42 characters will take more than 40 milliseconds tocomplete. This will frequently be an unacceptably long duration.
The most obvious way of solving this problem is to increase the baud rate; how-
ever, this is not always possible and it does not solve the underlying problem.
A better solution is to write all data to a buffer in the microcontroller. The contents
of this buffer will then be sent – usually one byte at a time – to the PC, using a regu-lar, scheduled task.
This solution is used in the code libraries presented in the following sections and
included on the accompanying CD. The architecture is a good example of a 
MULTI -
STAGE TASK [page 317], and is frequently used in user-interface libraries: LCD
CHARACTER PANEL [page 467], for example, uses a very similar architecture.
Using the on-chip U(S)ART for RS-232 communications
Having decided on the basic architecture for the RS-232 library, we need to consider
in more detail how the on-chip serial port is used.
This port is full duplex, meaning it can transmit and receive simultaneously. It is
also receive buffered, meaning it can commence reception of a second byte before apreviously received byte has been read from the receive register. (However, if the firstbyte still has not been read by the time reception of the second byte is complete, oneof the bytes will be lost.) 
The serial port can operate in four modes (one synchronous mode, three asynchro-
nous modes). In this pattern, we are primarily interested in Mode 1. In this mode, 10bits are transmitted (through TxD) or received (through RxD): a start bit (0), 8 databits (lsb first), and a stop bit (1). THE USER INTERFACE 366
TABLE 18.1 Connections required for a ‘straight through’ cable needed to link the 
microcontroller to the desktop PC (or similar terminal)
PC (COM1, COM2) Microcontroller
DB-9 connector DB-9 connector
RxD – Pin 2 to TxD – Pin 2 
TxD – Pin 3 to RxD – Pin 3
Ground – Pin 5 to Ground – Pin 5www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 392 ---
Note that the serial interface may also provide interrupt requests when transmis-
sion or reception of a byte has been completed. However, for reasons discussed inChapter 1, none of the code used in this pattern will generate interrupts.
Serial port registers
The serial port control and status register is the special function register SCON. Thisregister contains the mode selection bits (and the serial port interrupt bits, TI and RI). 
SBUF is the receive and transmit buffer of serial interface. Writing to SBUF loads
the transmit register and initiates transmission. Reading out SBUF accesses a physi-cally separate receive register.
Baud rate generation
There are several different ways to generate the baud rate clock for the serial portdepending on the mode in which it is operating. 
As already noted, we are primarily concerned here with the use of the serial port in
Mode 1. In this mode the baud rate is determined by the overflow rate of Timer 1 orTimer 2. For reasons discussed in Chapter 14, we assume that, if Timer 2 is available,it will usually be used to drive the scheduler. Therefore, we focus on the use of Timer1 for baud rate generation.
The baud rate is determined by the Timer 1 overflow rate and the value of
SMOD follows:
2
SMOD×FrequencyoscillatorBaud rate (Mode 1) = 
32 ×Instructionscycle×(256– TH1)
where:
SMOD is the ‘double baud rate’ bit in the PCON register
Frequencyoscillatoris the oscillator / resonator frequency
Instructionscycleis the number of machine instructions per oscillator cycle
(e.g. 12 or 6)TH1 is the reload value for Timer 1
Note that Timer 1 is used in 8-bit auto-reload mode and that interrupt generation
should be disabled.
To see why this is so, we will assume SMOD = 0 (it works equally well with SMOD =
1), that there are 12 instructions per cycle and that we require a baud rate of 9,600.The equation now becomes:
110592009600 =32 ×12 ×(256 – TH1)PC LINK (RS–232) 367
It is very important to appreciate that it is not generally possible to produce stan-
dard baud rates (e.g. 9600) using Timer 1, unless you use an 11.0592 MHz crystaloscillator. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 393 ---
This becomes:
11059200= 256 – TH19600 ×384
Or:
256 – TH1 = 3
Thus, if we set TH1 to 253 (0xFD) we get a precise 9,600 baud rate.
If, for example, we repeat this with a 12 MHz oscillator, we get:
12000000= 256 – TH19600 ×384
Or:
256 – TH1 = 3.255208333333
Thus, the required value of TH1 is 252.7447916667.
The nearest integer value is 253. This means that our actual baud rate will be
approximately 10,417 baud – more than 8% higher than the required (9,600) rate.
Dealing with the 11.0592 MHz problem
In a scheduled application, using an 11.0592 MHz crystal oscillator is not ideal.11.0592 MHz may translate into precise baud rates, but it is not ideal as a source of‘ticks’ in the scheduler: in particular, it is impossible to produce precise 1 ms ticksfrom an 8051 device driven by an 11.0592 MHz crystal.THE USER INTERFACE 368
Remember: This is an asynchronous protocol and relies for correct operation on
the fact that both ends of the connection are working at the same baud rate.In practice, you can generally work with a difference in baud rates at both ends ofthe connection by up to 5% , but no more. 
Despite the possible 5% margin, it is always good policy to get the baud rate as
close as possible to the standard value because, in the field , there may be signifi-
cant temperature variations between the oscillator in the PC and that in theembedded system. This will lead to a ‘drift’ in baud rates on PC and microcontroller,even if they were precisely the same to start with: as a result, if the baud rates wereinitially mismatched, then communication with the PC may fail completely duringnormal use. This type of ‘inexplicable fault’ has caused many developers sleeplessnights (’I don’t understand it! It works fine in all the tests in the lab!’).
Note also that it is generally essential to use some form of crystal oscillator
(rather 
than a ceramic resonator) when working with asynchronous serial links (such as
RS-232, RS-485 or CAN): the ceramic resonator is not sufficiently stable for this purpose:
see CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] and CERAMIC RESONATOR [page 64]
for details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 394 ---
There are at least four solutions to this problem:
GThe first solution is to use a 11.0592 MHz crystal and work with a 5 ms tick inter-
val. Note that a 5 ms interval can be generated precisely at this crystal frequency,as demonstrated in the example on the CD.
G The second solution is to use Timer 2 to generate the baud rates. Timer 2 allowsprecise baud-rate generation at a wider range of oscillator frequencies than Timer 1;of course – in a single-processor system – this means that Timer 2 cannot simulta-neously be used to generate the scheduler ticks, and Timer 0 or Timer 1 will needto be used for this purpose.
GThe third solution is to use the dedicated baud rate generator included on recent8051 devices. These allow very standard baud rates to be generated even with – say– 12 MHz crystals. In addition, use of a dedicated generator frees up the othertimers for general-purpose use. Again, one of the libraries on the CD make use ofinternal baud rate generator.
GThe fourth solution is to use two-microcontroller solution, and a shared-clock
scheduler. Figure 18.2 illustrates this approach.PC LINK (RS–232) 369
FIGURE  18.2 Using two processors and a shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler to provide precise 1 ms tick
intervals (via the 12 MHz crystal on the Master), and precise baud rates (via the 11.0592MHz crystal on the Slave). P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
(11.05 MHz)Reset/WD
moduleWD Refresh
RS-232
Oscillator
(12 MHz)Reset
modulewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 395 ---
PC software
We focus in this pattern on the software required on the microcontroller in order to
transfer data to a PC. Clearly, however, we also need software on the PC itself.
If your desktop computer is running Windows (95, 98, NT, 2000), then a simple
but effective option is the ‘Hyperterminal’ application which is included with all ofthese operating systems. Figure 18.3 shows this application running one of the exam-ple applications.
While Hyperterminal (or similar terminal-emulator programs in other environ-
ments) are useful, they are not suitable for all purposes. 
If you need more specialized PC code for storing or analyzing data from your
embedded application, you will probably need to write your own. Such programs liebeyond the scope of this book but Axelson (1998) is a good source of further informa-tion and useful code samples.
Hardware resource implications
The use of the PC link library described in this pattern has the following hardwareresource implications:THE USER INTERFACE 370
FIGURE  18.3 Using ‘Hyperterminal’ to display the information from an embedded microcontroller
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 396 ---
GIt uses the UART.
GIt uses two port pins (P3.0, P3.1).
GIt uses either a general-purpose timer or a specialized baud rate generator circuit.
Overall, however, it is the memory load that causes greatest difficulty, particularly
in situations where only internal memory is available. The root of this difficulty isthat fact that, as we discussed in ‘Solution’, the architecture used (to transmit data tothe PC) is based on the use of a buffer to which the user writes as required; this bufferis then emptied, one character at a time, by a scheduled task.
1 
The buffer itself is very simple:
// The transmit buffer length
#define PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH 100static tByte Tran_buffer[PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH];
If you run out of memory, there are several options:
GYou can reduce the buffer size. This may mean that tasks in your applications must
break down the data they send into smaller blocks. Typically, the main implicationis that shorter strings must be used.
G You can increase the baud rate and adapt the code so that the scheduler sendsmore than one byte of data in every time the ‘update’ function is run.
GIf using on-chip memory only, you can choose an 8051 device with additional on-chip RAM: for example, Dallas and Infineon produce a number of such devices. Wediscuss how to make use of this memory in 
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY [page 94].
Reliability and safety issues
We consider the reliability and safety implications of RS-232 communications in thissection.
What about printf()?
We do not generally recommend the use of standard library functions, such as
printf(), because:
GThis function sends data immediately to the UART. As a result, the duration of the
transmission is usually too long to be safely handled in a co-operatively scheduledapplication.
GMost implementations of printf() do not incorporate timeouts, making it possi-
ble that use of this functions can ‘hang’ the whole application if errors occur.PC LINK (RS–232) 371
1. Note that while both the ‘transmit’ and (where available) ‘receive’ channels have associated buffers,
the transmit buffer is usually larger than the recieve buffer, since – in most cases – the direction ofdataflow is from the microcontroller to the PC. As a result, we focus on the transmit buffer here.However, similar concerns – and solutions – apply to the receive buffer in circumstances where themain direction of information flow is from the PC to the microcontroller.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 397 ---
If you are determined to use printf() , refer to Chapter 10 where a simple library
using this function is presented.
General comments
The RS-232 protocol does not provide any adequate form of error checking: you needto carry this out manually. A simple approach is to send important data to the PC two(or more) times and compare the two (or more) versions: if there is a mismatch, havethe data sent again. Clearly, this approach greatly increases the required communica-tion bandwidth.
Portability
The UART is part of the 8051 core: therefore if your application has a UART-based RS-232 interface it will generally be portable. However, use of non-core features (likededicated baud rate generators or more than one serial port) will dramatically reducethe porting opportunities.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
RS-232 support is part of the 8051 core: applications based on RS-232 are
very portable.
At the PC end too, RS-232 is ubiquitous: every PC has one or more RS-232
ports.
Links can – with modern transceiver chips – be up to 30 m (100 ft) in
length.
Because of the hardware support, RS-232 generally imposes a low software
load.
RS-232 is a peer-to-peer protocol (unlike, for example, RS-485: see Chapter 27):
you can only connect one microcontroller directly (simultaneously) to each PC.
RS-232 has little or no error checking at the hardware level (unlike, for exam-
ple, CAN: see Chapter 28): if you want to be sure that the data you received atthe PC are valid, you need to carry out checks in software.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
There are several related patterns and some alternative solutions. We discuss these here.
Selecting an oscillator or resonator
As already noted, it is generally essential to use some form of crystal oscillator (rather
than a ceramic resonator) when working with asynchronous serial links: the ceramicresonator is not sufficiently stable for this purpose: see 
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54]
and CERAMIC RESONATOR [page 64] for details.THE USER INTERFACE 372www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 398 ---
Multi-drop communications
If you wish to connect more than one microcontroller to a single PC, this is readily
possible. Use a shared-clock scheduler (see SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )[page 593] and SCC
SCHEDULER [page 677]) to link the controllers together, and use a serial port on one of
the boards to send the data to the PC, over an RS-232 link. If required, you can senddata to multiple PCs in this way.
USB
RS-232 has been around since the 1960s. It is popular and effective, but has itslimitations. Increasingly, PCs are being released with (additional) USB (universal serialbus) ports. 
It is now becoming possible to use USB to transfer data between PCs and 8051
microcontrollers. For example, the Infineon C541 is an 8051 device with on-chip USBsupport. Note that this chip includes not just the USB controller, but also the driver aswell: unlike RS-232, no external transceiver hardware is required (Figure 18.4).
Other USB-compatible 8051 devices are the EZ-USB range from Cypress
Semiconductor,
2 and the TUSB3200 from Texas Instruments.3
Note that for 8051 microcontrollers without USB support, an alternative you may
wish to consider is the FT8U232AM USB UART chip from FTDI.4As far as the 8051 is
concerned, the USB UART appears to be an ordinary RS-232 transceiver.PC LINK (RS–232) 373
FIGURE  18.4 The organization of the Infineon C541 microcontroller, which has on-chip USB support,
(Reproduced courtesy of Infineon).
On-Chip Emulation Support ModuleOscillator
WatchdogWatchdog
TimerRAM
256 × 8Port 0
Port 1 T0 SSC
T1USB
ModulePower
Saving
Modes
USB TransceiverPort 2
Port 3OTP Prog. Memory
8k × 8CPU
D– D+I/O
I/O
I/O
I/O
2.www.cypress.com
3.www.ti.com
4.www.ftdi.co.ukwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 399 ---
Example: A PC Link library for the 8051/8052 (generic)
This example illustrates how to link a Standard 8051 device to a PC (listings 18.1 to
18.5). The software is menu driven in this example: the user is (via a terminal emula-tor on the PC) given the option of running one of three different tasks on themicrocontroller (see Figure 18.5).
In this library, the scheduler is driven by Timer 2, and Timer 1 is used for baud rate
generation.
As usual, all files for this example are included on the CD, in the directory associ-
ated with this chapter.THE USER INTERFACE 374
FIGURE  18.5 Connecting an 8051 microcontroller to a Max233 (RS-232) transceiver.1
6 95
Max
233Vcc
1.0 µF
19
181
20
6,97
TxRx
Connect together:
Pins 12 and 17Pins 11 and 15Pins 16 and 10RST
XTL1
XTL2
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7
P1.6P1.5P1.4P1.3P1.2
P1.1 (T2EX)
P1.0(T2)
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8052
VSS32
33343536373839
8
7654321
28
272625242322219
19
18
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
VccCxtalCxtalVcc (+5V)
GND RSTVcc
1812www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 400 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project IO_T2_T1
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Lnk_IO.C -----------------------------------------------// Pins 3.0 and 3.1 used for RS-232 interface/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.1 Part of a generic PC link library (menu driven)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for PC Link (RS-232) pattern.Linker options:OVERLAY (main ~ (MENU_Command_Processor), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (MENU_Command_Processor))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_05_11g.h"#include "Lnk_io_A.h"#include "Menu_A.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */PC LINK (RS–232) 375www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 401 ---
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Set baud rate to 9600: generic 8051 version
PC_LINK_Init_T1(9600);
// We have to schedule this task (10x – 100x a second)
//// TIMING IS IN TICKS NOT MILLISECONDS (5 ms tick interval)SCH_Add_Task(MENU_Command_Processor,10,2);
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{// Displays error codes on P4 (see Sch51.C)SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.2 Part of a generic PC link library (menu driven)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Menu_A.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple framework for interactive operation (e.g. data downloads) 
to / from desktop / notebook PC (etc) via serial (UART) link.
Use ‘Hyperterminal’ (under Windows 95, 98, 2000) or similar 
terminal emulator program on other operating systems.
Terminal options: - Data bits = 8
- Parity = None- Stop bits = 1- Flow control = Xon / Xoff
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/THE USER INTERFACE 376www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 402 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_05_11g.h"#include "Menu_A.h"#include "Lnk_IO_A.h"
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
MENU_Command_Processor()This function is the main menu 'command processor' function. Schedule this once every 10 ms (approx.).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void MENU_Command_Processor(void)
{static bit First_time_only;char Ch;
if (First_time_only == 0)
{First_time_only = 1;MENU_Show_Menu();}
// Check for user inputs
PC_LINK_Update();
Ch = PC_LINK_Get_Char_From_Buffer();if (Ch != PC_LINK_NO_CHAR)
{MENU_Perform_Task(Ch);MENU_Show_Menu();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
MENU_Show_Menu()Display menu options on PC screen (via serial link)
- edit as required to meet the needs of your application.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void MENU_Show_Menu(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Menu:\n"); PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("a - AAA xxx\n");PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("b - BBB xxx\n");PC LINK (RS–232) 377www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 403 ---
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("c - CCC xxx\n\n");
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Please type a character : ");}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
MENU_Perform_Task()Perform the required user task
- edit as required to match the needs of your application.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void MENU_Perform_Task(char c)
{// Echo the menu optionPC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(c);PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(’\n’);
// Perform the task
switch (c)
{case 'a':case 'A':
{Function_A();break;}
case 'b':
case 'B':
{Function_B();break;}
case 'c':
case 'C':
{Function_C();}
} 
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Placeholder function
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Function_A(void)
{THE USER INTERFACE 378www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 404 ---
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** Doing A ***\n\n");
P1 = ‘A’;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Placeholder function
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Function_B(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** Doing B ***\n\n");P1 = ‘B’;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Placeholder function
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Function_C(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** Doing C ***\n\n");P1 = 'C';}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.3 Part of a generic PC link library (menu driven)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Lnk_IO_A.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple PC link libraryUses the USART, and Pins 3.1 (Tx) and 3.0 (Rx) See text for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Lnk_IO_A.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern tByte In_read_index_G; PC LINK (RS–232) 379www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 405 ---
extern tByte In_waiting_index_G; 
extern tByte Out_written_index_G; 
extern tByte Out_waiting_index_G; 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Init_T1()This (generic) version uses T1 for baud rate generation.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Init_T1(const tWord BAUD_RATE)
{PCON &= 0x7F; // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don’t double baud rates)
// Receiver enabled.
// 8-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, // Variable baud rate (asynchronous)// Receive flag will only be set if a valid stop bit is received// Set TI (transmit buffer is empty)SCON = 0x72;
TMOD |= 0x20;   // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reloadTH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));
TL1 = TH1; 
TR1 = 1; // Run the timerTI = 1;  // Send first character (dummy)
// Set up the buffers for reading and writing
In_read_index_G = 0;In_waiting_index_G = 0;Out_written_index_G = 0;Out_waiting_index_G = 0;
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Serial interface initialized.\n");
// Interrupt *NOT* enabled
ES = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.4 Part of a generic PC link library (menu driven)THE USER INTERFACE 380www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 406 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Lnk_IO.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Core files for simple PC link library for 8051 familyUses the USART, and Pins 3.1 (Tx) and 3.0 (Rx) See text for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Lnk_io.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tByte In_read_index_G;    // Data in buffer that has been read 
tByte In_waiting_index_G; // Data in buffer not yet read
tByte Out_written_index_G;  // Data in buffer that has been written 
tByte Out_waiting_index_G;  // Data in buffer not yet written
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The error code variable
//// See Main.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------void PC_LINK_Send_Char(const char);// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// The receive buffer length
#define PC_LINK_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH 8
// The transmit buffer length
#define PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH 100
// Value returned by PC_LINK_Get_Char if no character is 
// available in buffer#define PC_LINK_NO_CHAR 127 
#define XON  0x11
#define XOFF 0x13
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------PC LINK (RS–232) 381www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 407 ---
static tByte Recv_buffer[PC_LINK_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH];
static tByte Tran_buffer[PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH];
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Update()Checks for character in the UART (hardware) receive buffer
Sends next character from the software transmit buffer
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Update(void)
{// Deal with transmit bytes here
// Is there any data ready to send?
if (Out_written_index_G < Out_waiting_index_G)
{PC_LINK_Send_Char(Tran_buffer[Out_written_index_G]); Out_written_index_G++;}
else
{// No data to send – just reset the buffer indexOut_waiting_index_G = 0;Out_written_index_G = 0;}
// Only dealing with received bytes here
// -> Just check the RI flagif (RI == 1)
{// Flag only set when a valid stop bit is received, // -> data ready to be read into the received buffer
// Want to read into index 0, if old data have been read
// (simple ~circular buffer)if (In_waiting_index_G == In_read_index_G)
{ In_waiting_index_G = 0;In_read_index_G = 0;} 
// Read the data from USART buffer 
Recv_buffer[In_waiting_index_G] = SBUF;
if (In_waiting_index_G < PC_LINK_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH)
{THE USER INTERFACE 382www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 408 ---
// Increment without overflowing buffer
In_waiting_index_G++;}
RI = 0; // Clear RT flag
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer()Stores a character in the ‘write’ buffer, ready for 
later transmission
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(const char CHARACTER)
{// Write to the buffer *only* if there is spaceif (Out_waiting_index_G < PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH)
{Tran_buffer[Out_waiting_index_G] = CHARACTER;Out_waiting_index_G++; }
else
{// Write buffer is full// Increase the size of PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH// or increase the rate at which UART ‘update’ function is called // or reduce the amount of data sent to PCError_code_G = ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer()
Copies a (null terminated) string to the character buffer. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer(const char* const STR_PTR)
{tByte i = 0;while (STR_PTR[i] != ‘\0’)
{PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(STR_PTR[i]);i++;PC LINK (RS–232) 383www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 409 ---
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Get_Char_From_Buffer()Retrieves a character from the (input) buffer, if available
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
char PC_LINK_Get_Char_From_Buffer(void)
{char Ch = PC_LINK_NO_CHAR;
// If there is new data in the buffer
if (In_read_index_G < In_waiting_index_G)
{Ch = Recv_buffer[In_read_index_G];
if (In_read_index_G < PC_LINK_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH)
{In_read_index_G++;}
}
return Ch;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Send_Char()Based on Keil sample code, with added (loop) timeouts.
Implements Xon / Off control.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Send_Char(const char CHARACTER)
{tLong Timeout1 = 0;tLong Timeout2 = 0;
if (CHARACTER == '\n') 
{if (RI) 
{if (SBUF == XOFF) 
{Timeout2 = 0;THE USER INTERFACE 384www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 410 ---
do {
RI = 0;
// Wait for uart (with simple timeout)
Timeout1 = 0;while ((++Timeout1) && (RI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// USART did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
} while ((++Timeout2) && (SBUF != XON));
if (Timeout2 == 0)
{// uart did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
RI = 0; 
}
}
Timeout1 = 0;
while ((++Timeout1) && (TI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// uart did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
TI = 0;
SBUF = 0x0d;  // output CR }if (RI) 
{if (SBUF == XOFF) 
{Timeout2 = 0;
do {
RI = 0;PC LINK (RS–232) 385www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 411 ---
// Wait for USART (with simple timeout)
Timeout1 = 0;while ((++Timeout1) && (RI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// USART did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
} while ((++Timeout2) && (SBUF != XON));
RI = 0; 
}
}
Timeout1 = 0;
while ((++Timeout1) && (TI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// USART did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
TI = 0;SBUF = CHARACTER;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.5 Part of a generic PC link library (menu driven)
Example: Using a dedicated baud rate generator
As we noted in ‘Solution’, some 8051 microcontrollers have a timer dedicated to baud
rate generation. This can be a useful facility, since it leaves us (usually) with three freetimers for use in the scheduler, creation of delays and so on.
In this example, we present an ‘output only’ library for the Infineon C515c (list-
ings 18.6 to 18.11). This uses the C515C baud rate generator. In the example, wedisplay elapsed time on the screen of a PC or similar terminal.THE USER INTERFACE 386www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 412 ---
There are two main points to note in this example:
GThe library is considerably smaller and simpler than the ‘duplex’ library presented
earlier.
G The microcontroller is running at 10 MHz; despite this, the internal baud rate gen-erator allows us to create a very accurate baud rate for the serial link. This is a veryuseful feature.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project O_T2_IN
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Lnk_IO.C -----------------------------------------------// Pins 3.0 and 3.1 used for RS-232 interface/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.6 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515c
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for output-only PC link library, based on c515c.
Linker options:PC LINK (RS–232) 387www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 413 ---
OVERLAY (main ~ (PC_LINK_Update,Elapsed_Time_RS232_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (PC_LINK_Update,Elapsed_Time_LCD_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_10i.h"#include "Lnk_O_B.h"#include "Elap_232.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Set baud rate to 9600, using internal baud rate generator
PC_LINK_Init_Internal(9600);
// Prepare the elapsed time library
Elapsed_Time_RS232_Init();
// We have to schedule this task (~100x a second is enough here)
// - this writes data to PC //// TIMING IS IN TICKS (1 ms tick interval)SCH_Add_Task(PC_LINK_Update, 10, 10);
// Update the time once per second
SCH_Add_Task(Elapsed_Time_RS232_Update, 1000, 1000);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{// Displays error codes on P4 (see Sch51.C)SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.7 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515cTHE USER INTERFACE 388www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 414 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elap_232.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple library function for keeping track of elapsed time 
Demo version to display time on PC screen via RS232 link.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Elap_232.h"#include "Lnk_O.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tByte Hou_G = 0;
tByte Min_G = 0;tByte Sec_G = 0;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// See Char_Map.c
extern const char code CHAR_MAP_G[10]; 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elapsed_Time_RS232_Init()Init function for simple library displaying elapsed time on PC
screen.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Elapsed_Time_RS232_Init(void)
{char Time_Str[] = ‘Elapsed time’;
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer(Time_Str); 
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elapsed_Time_RS232_Update()Function for displaying elapsed time on PC Screen.*** Must be scheduled once per second ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Elapsed_Time_RS232_Update(void) 
{char Time_Str[30] = ‘\rElapsed time: ‘;PC LINK (RS–232) 389www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 415 ---
if (++Sec_G == 60) 
{ Sec_G = 0;
if (++Min_G == 60) 
{Min_G = 0;
if (++Hou_G == 24) 
{ Hou_G = 0;}
}
}
Time_Str[15] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G / 10];
Time_Str[16] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G % 10];
Time_Str[18] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G / 10];
Time_Str[19] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G % 10];
Time_Str[21] = CHAR_MAP_G[Sec_G / 10];
Time_Str[22] = CHAR_MAP_G[Sec_G % 10];
// We don’t display seconds in this version.
// We simply use the seconds data to turn on and off the colon// (between hours and minutes) if ((Sec_G % 2) == 0)
{Time_Str[17] = ':';Time_Str[20] = ':';}
else
{Time_Str[17] = ' ';Time_Str[20] = ' ';}
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer(Time_Str);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.8 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515cTHE USER INTERFACE 390www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 416 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Char_Map.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
This lookup table (stored in ROM) is used to convert 'integer' 
values into appropriate character codes for the LCD display and RS232 link.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------const char code CHAR_MAP_G[10] 
= {'0','1','2','3','4','5','6','7','8','9'};
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.9 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515c
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Lnk_O_B.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple PC link library version B (for c515c, internal baud rate)Uses the USART, and Pin 3.1 (Tx) See text for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Lnk_O_B.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern tByte Out_written_index_G; 
extern tByte Out_waiting_index_G; 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Init_Internal()This version uses internal baud rate generator on C5x5 family.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/PC LINK (RS–232) 391www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 417 ---
void PC_LINK_Init_Internal(const tWord BAUD_RATE)
{tWord SRELplus1024;tWord SRELx;
PCON &= 0x7F; // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don’t double baud rates)// Receiver disabled
// 8-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, variable baud rate (asynchronous)
SCON = 0x42;// Use the internal baudrate generator (80c5x5 family)
ADCON0 |= 0x80;// Set the baud rate (begin)SRELplus1024 = (tWord)((((tLong) OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * 1000));
SRELx = 1024 – SRELplus1024;SRELL = (tByte)(SRELx & 0x00FF);
SRELH = (tByte)((SRELx & 0x0300) >> 8);
TI = 1;
// Set the baud rate (end)
// Set up the buffers for writing
Out_written_index_G = 0;Out_waiting_index_G = 0;
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Serial interface initialized.\n");// Serial interrupt *NOT* enabled
ES = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.10 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515c
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Lnk_O.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Core files for simple write-only PC link library for 8051 family
[Sends data to PC – cannot receive data from PC]THE USER INTERFACE 392www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 418 ---
Uses the USART, and Pin 3.1 (Tx) 
See text for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Lnk_O.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tByte Out_written_index_G;  // Data in buffer that has been written 
tByte Out_waiting_index_G;  // Data in buffer not yet written
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// The transmit buffer length
#define PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH 100
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------static tByte Tran_buffer[PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH];/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Update()
Sends next character from the software transmit bufferNOTE: Output-only library (Cannot receive chars)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Update(void)
{// Deal with transmit bytes here
// Is there any data ready to send?
if (Out_written_index_G < Out_waiting_index_G)
{PC_LINK_Send_Char(Tran_buffer[Out_written_index_G]); 
Out_written_index_G++;
}
else
{PC LINK (RS–232) 393www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 419 ---
// No data to send – just reset the buffer index
Out_waiting_index_G = 0;Out_written_index_G = 0;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer()Stores a character in the 'write' buffer, ready for 
later transmission
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(const char CHARACTER)
{// Write to the buffer *only* if there is spaceif (Out_waiting_index_G < PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH)
{Tran_buffer[Out_waiting_index_G] = CHARACTER;Out_waiting_index_G++; }
else
{// Write buffer is full// Increase the size of PC_LINK_TRAN_BUFFER_LENGTH// or increase the rate at which UART 'update' function is called // or reduce the amount of data sent to PCError_code_G = ERROR_USART_WRITE_CHAR;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Send_Char()Based on Keil sample code, with added (loop) timeouts.
Implements Xon / Off control.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Send_Char(const char CHARACTER)
{tLong Timeout1 = 0;
if (CHARACTER == ‘\n’) 
{Timeout1 = 0;THE USER INTERFACE 394www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 420 ---
while ((++Timeout1) && (TI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// usart did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
TI = 0;
SBUF = 0x0d; // output CR }
Timeout1 = 0;
while ((++Timeout1) && (TI == 0)); 
if (Timeout1 == 0)
{// usart did not respond – errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI;return;} 
TI = 0;SBUF = CHARACTER;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer()Copies a (null terminated) string to the character buffer. 
(The contents of the buffer are then passed over the serial link.)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer(const char* const STR_PTR)
{tByte i = 0;
while (STR_PTR[i] != ‘\0’)
{PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(STR_PTR[i]);i++;}
}PC LINK (RS–232) 395www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 421 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 18.11 Part of an example using a dedicated timer for baud rate generation on 
the Infineon c515
Example: An output-only library for the 8051/8052 
(generic)
This example again illustrates how to link a Standard 8051 device to a PC. 
Unlike the first example, the software is ‘write only’: data are transferred from the
microcontroller to the PC but not vice versa. To illustrate this, the software displayselapsed time on the PC via a terminal emulator program.
In Figure 18.6, we illustrate this software running on the Keil hardware simulator.
Of course, it may equally well display its outputs using Hyperterminal (or equivalent),as in Figure 18.3: however, the use of the hardware simulator is useful during theearly stages of program development.
The hardware shown in Figure 18.2 can again be used here to run this program.The source code for this example is included on the CD. 
Further reading
In a very readable book, Axelson (1998) considers the use of RS-232 communications.Although she discusses 8051 microcontrollers, the main focus is on the PC end of thecommunication link. Axelson provides some useful code examples that can beadapted for use in many PC-based data acquisition and monitoring systems.THE USER INTERFACE 396
FIGURE  18.6 Output from a simple ‘output only’ PC link library running under the Keil hardware
simulator. 
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 422 ---
Switch interfaces
Introduction
Reading the status of one or more push-button switches is a very common require-
ment in embedded applications. The four patterns in this chapter describe differentsolutions to this problem.
The patterns are as follows:
GSWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399]
Uses a minimum of external hardware. Reads a single switch, debounces it and
reports its status
GSWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410]
Use external hardware to perform switch debouncing. Increased cost (compared
with SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )), but much higher level of protection against
ESD, malicious damage etc.
GON-OFF SWITCH [page 414]
Building on SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )or SWITCH INTERFACE (HARD -
WARE )this pattern provides, through software, the following behaviour:
Assume that the switch is in the OFF state. It remains in this state until it is pressed.
When pressed, the state changes to ON. It remains in this state until it is pressed. Whenpressed, the state changes to OFF .
This type of behaviour can be used, for example, to allow a single (non-latching)
switch to control a piece of machinery.
GMULTI -STATE SWITCH [page 423]
Building on SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )or SWITCH INTERFACE (HARD -
WARE )this pattern provides, through software, the following behaviour:
Assume that the switch state is in the OFF state. The switch is pressed and briefly held.
The switch state changes to ‘ON STATE 1’. The user continues to depress the switch.  Theswitch state becomes ‘ON STATE 2’, etc. Releasing the switch (at any time) puts theswitch back in the OFF state.chapter 19www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 423 ---
That is, the switch state depends on the duration of the switch press. Any
number of ‘ON’ states may be supported (although having more than around threeis generally very confusing for the user). 
This type of behaviour can be useful when, for example, setting time on a clock.
Pressing the set switch will initially cause the displayed time to change slowly; sus-tained depressions will cause the displayed time to increase more rapidly.THE USER INTERFACE 398
Note: For reasons discussed in SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE ), in ‘Safety and
reliability’, we are only concerned with push-button switches in these patterns:‘toggle’ or ‘latching’ switches are not considered (and the use of such switches isnot recommended).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 424 ---
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you connect the port pin of an 8051 microcontroller to some form ofmechanical switch (for example, a simple push-button switch or an electromechani-cal relay)?
Background
Consider the simple push-button switches illustrated in Figure 19.1.
Depressing this switch will, in either arrangement, cause a voltage change from
approximately Vcc to 0V at the input port. 
In an ideal world, this change in voltage would take the form illustrated in Figure
19.2 (top). In practice, all mechanical switch contacts bounce (that is, turn on and off,
repeatedly, for a short period of time) after the switch is closed or opened. As a result,the actual input waveform looks more like that shown in Figure 19.2 (bottom).Usually, switches bounce for less than 20 ms: however large mechanical switchesSWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 399
FIGURE  19.1 An example of a push-button (‘normally open’) switch input
[Note: The resistor-free arrangement [left] is appropriate where port pins have an internal pull resistor: this is usually the case on the 8051
family, with the exception of Port 0. Where there is no internal pull-up, the arrangement on the right must be used.]Vcc
10K
PB NO input PB NO inputwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 425 ---
exhibit bounce behaviour for 50 ms or more.
This bounce is equivalent to pressing an idealized switch multiple times. This
causes various potential problems, not least:
GIf we need to distinguish between single and multiple switch presses: for example,rather than reading ‘A’ from a keypad, we read ‘AAAAA’.
GIf we wish to count the number of switch presses.
GIf we need to distinguish between a switch being depressed and being released: forexample, if the switch is depressed once and then released some time later, thebounce will make it appear as if the switch has been pressed again.
Solution
Checking for a switch input is, in essence, straightforward:
1We read the relevant port pin.
2If we think we have detected a switch depression, we read the pin again (say) 20ms later.
3If the second reading confirms the first reading, then we assume the switch reallyhas been depressed.
Note that the figure of ‘20 ms’ will, of course, depend on the switch used: the data
sheet of the switch will provide this information. If you have no data sheet, you caneither experiment with different figures or measure directly using an oscilloscope.
We illustrate this basic procedure in the example.THE USER INTERFACE 400
FIGURE  19.2 The voltage signal resulting from the switch shown in Figure 19.1
[Note: [Top] Idealized waveform resulting from a switch depressed at time t1 and released at time t2. [Bottom] Actual waveform showi ng
leading edge bounce following switch depression and trailing edge bounce following switch release.]+5V+5V
t1 t2 TimeVoltagewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 426 ---
Hardware resource implications
Reading a switch input in software imposes very minor loads on CPU and memory
resources.
Reliability and safety issues
We consider some reliability and safety issues associated with switches here.
Latching vs. push-button switches
All the examples in this chapter (and throughout this book) focus on the use of push-button (rather than ‘latching’) switches. 
To illustrate why this is the case, we will consider two possible designs for a switch-
based interface (Figure 19.3). The first interface design uses a ‘latching’ switch:specifically, this is a 5-position, rotary switch. The second design uses two push-button switches and five LEDs to provide similar functionality.
We can immediately see some advantages of the push-button solution when we
consider how each system behaves when power is first applied and in an emergencysituation.
In the case of the push-button solution, the software designer has control of the
initial state. For example, if it is appropriate to always start the system in ‘State 2’ (asillustrated in Figure 19.3), this can be easily achieved. Similarly, suppose that State 5involves control of a piece of machinery: if a problem develops with the machine, wemight need to change the system to (say) State 4. Again, we can do this under soft-ware control and we can make this change clear to the user simply by lighting
the appropriate LED .
The rotary switch interface behaves very differently. If the user moves the switch to
Position 5 before applying power, then, at power up, how do we move the system toState 2? And if we do change the state to State 2, we cannot indicate this fact to theuser, since we are unable to move the rotary switch. Similarly, in the emergency situa-tion just discussed, we may be able to shut down the machine under software control,but we cannot show the user that the system is now in State 4.SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 401
FIGURE  19.3 Two possible switch-based interfaces
[Note:The latching solution (left) is not recommended for reasons discussed in the text.]54
123
12345www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 427 ---
These problems arise not just with multi-state rotary switches but with any form of
latching switch. 
Switch bounce times
In electrical engineering terms, the switches used as inputs in a typical microcon-
troller system are ‘dry’. This means that, because they must handle only smallcurrents (< 20 mA) and voltages (< 10V), they suffer little (electrical) ‘wear and tear’and can be expected to have a long life. 
However, switches also have moving mechanical parts and their performance,
inevitably, varies with age. Even a good quality switch will change its performance asit is used: in particular, the period of bounce tends to increase with age. As a result, itis important not to trust to luck or experiments with new switches when determiningappropriate debounce times: you should allow a margin (at least 20%) with newswitches to allow for the impact of prolonged usage.
Using single-pole switches
We have already discussed the advantages of push-button (PB) switches.Unfortunately, simply using a PB switch is not enough to ensure reliability. For exam-ple, consider again the switch in Figure 19.1: this type of switch is often referred to as‘normally open’ (NO). If this form of NO switch is removed or damaged, leaving theconnection permanently open, we cannot detect this fact in software. This may havesafety or reliability implications.
In some circumstances, there may be advantages to using a ‘normally closed’ (NC)
PB switch (Figure 19.4). Using a PB-NC switch, we can detect the removal of theswitch or damage to the wiring, although we cannot generally distinguish this from anormal (sustained) switch depression.THE USER INTERFACE 402
We can summarize the advantage of the push-button solution by saying that it
leaves the software in control of the hardware , rather than vice versa. This is a
good general design guideline in embedded systems.
FIGURE  19.4 An example of a push-button (‘normally closed’) switch inputVcc
R
PB NO inputwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 428 ---
We can provide an even more reliable solution by using a PB ‘double-pole, double-
throw’ (PB-DPDT) switch (Figure 19.5). This generates two inputs, which will alwayshave opposite logic if the switch is undamaged and wired correctly. Using such aninput device, we can detect various types of switch faults (including switch removal)and wiring faults (including wire cutting). 
Note that such a switch requires two input pins and slightly more software than a
single-pole switch input. 
Out-of-range inputs and ESD
Like all software-only input techniques, SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )provides no
protection against out-of-range inputs: if someone applies +/–20V to your switch (bymistake or deliberately), they may ‘fry’ the microcontroller. 
Similar problems arise in the event of electrostatic discharge (ESD). ESD can pres-
ent a significant problem in harsh environments (e.g. industrial systems, automotiveapplications) and compliance with international standards in this area (e.g. IEC 1000-4-2) is a requirement for some applications. 
There is little you can do, in software, to guard again either of these situations. See
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410] for a discussion of this issue and a solution. 
Portability
None of these discussions in this pattern is 8051 specific: the pattern may be used
with other microcontroller families without difficulty.SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 403
FIGURE  19.5 An example of a push-button DPDT switch input
[Note:With the arrangement shown, Input 1 will have a voltage of 0V and Input 2 Vcc with the switch open: these values will be revers ed
when the switch is closed.]NO
NC
NONCVcc
R
PB DPDT Input 2
PB DPDT Input 1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 429 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )requires a minimum of external hardware.
It is very flexible: for example, the programmer can incorporate ‘auto-repeat’
functions with few code changes.
It is simple and cheap to implement.Like all software-only input techniques, 
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE ) pro-
vides no protection against out-of-range inputs or electrostatic discharge (ESD).See 
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410] for a discussion of this issue and
a solution. 
Related patterns and alternative solutions
Reading a switch input is a classic example of a situation where we can trade hard-
ware cost against software complexity. For an alternative approach using hardware,consider 
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410].
Where the switch (or other input device) does not suffer from bounce (for exam-
ple, where your input is derived from a solid-state relay or some other form of‘electronic switch’) then much of the complexity of these input strategies can beavoided through the use of 
PORT I /O[page 174].
Example: Controlling a flashing LED
In this example, we use a push-button switch to control the flashing of an LED. Here
the LED flashes only when the switch is pressed.
The hardware used is illustrated in Figure 19.6 and the software framework is given
in Listings 19.1 to 19.4.THE USER INTERFACE 404
FIGURE  19.6 Some test hardware used to demonstrate a simple, software-based switch interfaceRST
P3.0
P3.1
XTL2XTL1
P3.2
P3.3
P3.4
P3.5GND
10987654321
11121314151617181920 VCC
P1.7
P1.6
P1.5P1.4
P1.3
P1.2
P1.1
P1.0P3.7Amtel 105112 MHz10K 200ΩVcc
10 µFwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 430 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project SWITCH_A
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------Swit_A.C -------------------------------------------------
// Connect single push-button switch on this pin (to gnd)
// - debounced in softwaresbit Sw_pin = P1^2;    // The switch pin
// ------ LED_Swit.C -----------------------------------------------
// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]sbit LED_pin = P1^3;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.1 Part of the software used to demonstrate a simple, software-based 
switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) pattern.
See Chapter 19 for details.Required linker options (see text for details):
OVERLAY (main ~ (SWITCH_Update, LED_Flash_Switch_Update), SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (SWITCH_Update,LED_Flash_Switch_Update))SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 405www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 431 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Swit_A.h"#include "0_01_12g.H"#include "LED_Swit.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the scheduler SCH_Init_T0();
// Set up the switch pin
SWITCH_Init();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Switch_Init();
// Add a 'SWITCH_Update' task, every ~200 ms.
// Scheduler timings is in ticks. // [1 ms tick interval - see Sch 'init' function]SCH_Add_Task(SWITCH_Update, 0, 200);
// Add LED task
// Here, LED will only flash while switch is pressed...SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Switch_Update, 5, 1000);
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.2 Part of the software used to demonstrate a simple, software-based 
switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Swit..C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------THE USER INTERFACE 406www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 432 ---
Simple 'Flash LED' test function for scheduler.
(Controlled by switch press)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "LED_Swit.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
extern bit Sw_pressed_G;
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static bit LED_state_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Switch_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Switch_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Switch_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.
Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must scheduleat 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Switch_Update(void)
{// Do nothing if switch is not pressedif (!Sw_pressed_G)
{return;}
// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)
if (LED_state_G == 1)SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 407www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 433 ---
{
LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.3 Part of the software used to demonstrate a simple, software-based 
switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWIT_A.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple switch interface code, with software debounce.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Swit_A.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------bit Sw_pressed_G = 0; // The current switch status
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Allows NO or NC switch to be used (or other wiring variations)
#define SW_PRESSED (0)
// SW_THRES must be > 1 for correct debounce behaviour
#define SW_THRES (3)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_Init()Initialization function for the switch library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/THE USER INTERFACE 408www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 434 ---
void SWITCH_Init(void)
{Sw_pin = 1; // Use this pin for input}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_Update()This is the main switch function.  It should be scheduled every 50 - 500 ms.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_Update(void)
{static tByte Duration;
if (Sw_pin == SW_PRESSED)
{Duration += 1;
if (Duration > SW_THRES)
{Duration = SW_THRES;
Sw_pressed_G = 1;  // Switch is pressed...
return;}
// Switch pressed, but not yet for long enough
Sw_pressed_G = 0;return; }
// Switch not pressed - reset the count
Duration = 0;Sw_pressed_G = 0;  // Switch not pressed...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.4 Part of the software used to demonstrate a simple, software-based 
switch interface
Further reading
—SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE) 409www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 435 ---
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you create a very robust switch interface for use in a hostile (e.g. industrial,automotive) environment?
Background
Consider the following scenarios:
GYour embedded application is used in an industrial environment where high levelsof electrostatic discharge are likely. How can you ensure that your device remainsfully operational?
GYour automotive security application may be the subject of deliberate vandalism ordamage. Specifically, reports on the WWW have revealed that thieves have found itpossible to disable a similar security system by applying 12V from a car batterydirectly to one of the system switches. How can you ensure that your system is morerobust?
In general, 
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399] describes techniques that
are only suitable in ‘safe’ applications: in hostile environments, you need a morerobust solution. This must be hardware based.
Solution
As noted in ‘Background’, creating a robust switch interface requires the use of off-chip hardware.
Traditionally, techniques involving J-K flip-flops, high-impedence CMOS gates or
R-C integrators have all been used for switch debouncing: Huang (2000), for example,provides details of these techniques. In general, these approaches – while performingthe debounce operation – provide only very limited protection, at best, again ESD andsimilar hazards. Because, as we saw in 
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399],
the process of switch debouncing is almost trivial in a scheduled application, the costof external hardware for switch debouncing alone cannot generally be justified. THE USER INTERFACE 410www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 436 ---
More recently, several specialized ICs for protection and switch debouncing have
appeared on the market. Of these, the Maxim 6816/6817/6818 family are a goodexample (Figure 19.7).
This is how Maxim describes these devices:
GThe Max6816/Max6817/Max6818 are single, dual, and octal switch debouncersthat provide clean interfacing of mechanical switches to digital systems. Theyaccept one or more bouncing inputs from a mechanical switch and produce a cleandigital output after a short, preset qualification delay. Both the switch openingbounce and the switch closing bounce are removed. 
GRobust inputs can exceed power supplies by up to ±25V. 
GESD protection for input pins:
±15 kV Human Body Model
±8 kV IEC 1000-4-2, Contact Discharge±15 kV IEC 1000-4-2, Air-Gap Discharge
GSingle-supply operation from +2.7V to +5.5V. 
GSingle (Max6816), dual (Max6817) and octal (Max6818) versions available. 
GNo external components required. 
G6 µA supply current. 
Hardware resource implications
Reading a debounced switch input imposes minimal loads on CPU and memory
resources.
Reliability and safety issues
For the reasons discussed in ‘Solution’, this is a highly reliable method for creating aswitch interface.
For additional reliability – particularly in the event of malicious damage – see SWITCH
INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399] for discussions on the use of multi-pole switches.SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE) 411
FIGURE  19.7 Typical application circuit for the Max6816Max
6816Vcc(2.7 – 5.5V)
Debounced
Inputwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 437 ---
Portability
These techniques are inherently portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Greatly increased reliability (compared with software-only solutions) in
hostile environments.
Increased costs and hardware complexity.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399].
Example: Reading 8 switch inputs in a hostile environment
Figure 19.8 illustrates the use of a Max6818 to read the inputs from eight switches
connected to Port 1 of an 8051 device. The results are reported on Port 2.THE USER INTERFACE 412
FIGURE  19.8 Using a Max6818 to debounce eight switchesRledRledRledRledRledRledRledRled
8051 devicePort 2LED 7VccULN2803AP2.0 – Pin8
P2.1 – Pin7P2.2 – Pin6P2.3 – Pin5P2.4 – Pin4P2.5 – Pin3P2.6 – Pin2P2.7 – Pin1
Pin11 – LED0
Pin12 – LED1Pin13 – LED2Pin14 – LED3Pin15 – LED4Pin16 – LED5Pin17 – LED6Pin18 – LED7
LED 6 LED 5 LED 4 LED 3 LED 2 LED 1 LED 0For 25mA LEDs, Rled = 120 Ohms
9
Max
6818Port 1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 438 ---
The software requirements can be most easily met using a SUPER LOOP [page 162],
as shown in Listing 19.5.
void main(void)
{
while(1)
{P2 = P1;}
}
Listing 19.5 A trivial Super Loop switch interface
Further reading
—SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE) 413www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 439 ---
ON-OFF SWITCH
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you obtain the behaviour illustrated in Figure 19.9 from a single, push-button switch connected to the port pin of a microcontroller?
Background
Consider a problem that can arise when we have a single switch used to turn on andoff a piece of equipment (Figure 19.10).THE USER INTERFACE 414
FIGURE  19.9 Creating an ‘on-off’ (latching) behaviour using a single push-button switchOFF STATE
ON STATESwitch is pressed Switch is pressed
FIGURE  19.10 Illustrating the ‘on-off’ problemOn / Offwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 440 ---
The switch is intended to operate as follows:
GThe user presses the switch to turn on a piece of equipment.
GThe equipment operates as required.
GThe user presses the switch again to turn off the equipment.
This seems very straightforward. However, suppose we are applying the basic
approach to switch reading presented in SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399],
orSWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410]. This can be summarized as follows:
1We read the relevant port pin.
2If we think we have detected a switch depression, we read the pin again 100 ms
later.
3If the second reading confirms the first reading, we assume the switch really hasbeen depressed.
This is what can happen:
GThe user presses the switch to turn on the piece of equipment.
GThe switch is checked. It is depressed.
GThe switch is checked (say) 100 ms later: the second check confirms the first. The
equipment is turned on.
GThe switch is checked 100 ms later. It is still depressed.
GThe switch is checked 100 ms later: the second check confirms the first. The equip-ment is turned off again.
GAnd so on.
This behaviour arises because the user will generally wait until the equipment
begins to work and will then remove their finger from the switch. In the best case sce-nario, a switch depression is likely to last about 500 ms. Unless we take action toprevent it, the equipment will ‘flicker’ on and off.
Solution
We can most simply create an on-off switch by adding a ‘switch block’ counter to theexisting interface code. This works as follows:
1Every time we find the switch has been pressed, we ‘block’ it for – say – 1 second.
2While the switch is blocked, any changes in switch status are ignored: thus,for example, if the user keeps the switch depressed for half a second, this fact willbe ignored.
The ‘on-off’ example that follows illustrates how this is achieved in practice.ON-OFF SWITCH 415www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 441 ---
Hardware resource implications
Reading a switch input imposes minimal loads on CPU and memory resources.
Reliability and safety issues
In hostile environments, this code should be based on SWITCH INTERFACE (HARD -
WARE ) [page 410].
Note that, where safety is a primary concern, the blocking of switch inputs may
not be appropriate. As an alternative, you can retain the basic switch-handlingapproach, but use two switches (Figure 19.11).
The use of two switches can make it easier to react quickly to changes in the inputs
and may be safer under some circumstances.
Portability
This pattern may be adapted for use with other microcontrollers without difficulty.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple way of achieving ‘ON–OFF’ behaviour from a single switch.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
This pattern builds on SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399] and / or SWITCH
INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410].
See ‘Reliability and safety issues’ for an alternative solution.
Example: Controlling a flashing LED
In this example, we use the hardware in Figure 19.12 to illustrate the creation of anon-off switch interface.
The key software files required in this example are presented in Listings 19.6 to
19.9: as usual, a complete set of files for the project are included on the CD.THE USER INTERFACE 416
FIGURE  19.11 One approach to solving the ‘on-off’ problemOn Offwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 442 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project ON_OFF
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------Swit_C.C -------------------------------------------------// Connect single push-button switch on this pin (to gnd)
// - debounced in softwaresbit Sw_pin = P1^2;    // The switch pin
// ------ LED_Swit.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]sbit LED_pin = P1^3;ON-OFF SWITCH 417
FIGURE  19.12 Hardware for an ‘on-off’ LED demonstratorRST
P3.0P3.1XTL2XTL1
P3.2
P3.3
P3.4
P3.5GND
10987654321
11121314151617181920 VCC
P1.7P1.6P1.5P1.4
P1.3
P1.2
P1.1
P1.0P3.7Amtel 105112 MHz10K 200ΩVcc
10 µFwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 443 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.6 Part of an example demonstrating a software-based switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for ON-OFF SWITCH pattern.See Chapter 19 for details.Required linker options (see text for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update, LED_Flash_Switch_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update,LED_Flash_Switch_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Swit_C.h"#include "0_01_12g.H"#include "LED_Swit.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{
// Set up the scheduler 
SCH_Init_T0();
// Set up the switch pin
SWITCH_ON_OFF_Init();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Switch_Init();
// Add a 'SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update' task, every ~200 ms.
// Scheduler timings is in ticks. // [1 ms tick interval - see Sch 'init' function]SCH_Add_Task(SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update, 0, 200);
// Add LED task
// Here, LED will only flash while switch is in ON stateSCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Switch_Update, 0, 1000);THE USER INTERFACE 418www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 444 ---
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.7 Part of an example demonstrating a software-based switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Swit.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 'Flash LED' test function for scheduler.(Controlled by switch press)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "LED_Swit.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
extern bit Sw_pressed_G;
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static bit LED_state_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Switch_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Switch_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}ON-OFF SWITCH 419www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 445 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Switch_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must scheduleat 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Switch_Update(void)
{// Do nothing if switch is not pressedif (!Sw_pressed_G)
{return;}
// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)
if (LED_state_G == 1)
{LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.8 Part of an example demonstrating a software-based switch interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWIT_C.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
On-Off Switch code, with software debounce.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/THE USER INTERFACE 420www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 446 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Swit_C.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------bit Sw_pressed_G = 0; // The current switch status
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Allows NO or NC switch to be used (or other wiring variations)
#define SW_PRESSED (0)
// SW_THRES must be > 1 for correct debounce behaviour
#define SW_THRES (3)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------static tByte Sw_press_duration_G = 0;
static tByte Sw_blocked_G = 0;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
FUNCTION: SWITCH_ON_OFF_Init()Initialization function for the switch library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_ON_OFF_Init(void)
{Sw_pin = 1;      // Use this pin for input
Sw_pressed_G = 0;  // Switch is initially OFF
Sw_press_duration_G = 0;  Sw_blocked_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
FUNCTION: SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update()This is the main on-off switch function.  It should be scheduled every 50 - 500 ms.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_ON_OFF_Update(void)
{// If the switch is blocked, decrement the count and return// without checking the switch pin status.// This is done to give the user time to remove their finger ON-OFF SWITCH 421www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 447 ---
// from the switch - otherwise if they keep their finger on
// the switch for more than 0.4s the light will switch off again.
if (Sw_blocked_G)
{Sw_blocked_G--;return;}
if (Sw_pin == SW_PRESSED)
{Sw_press_duration_G += 1;
if (Sw_press_duration_G > SW_THRES)
{Sw_press_duration_G = SW_THRES;
// Change switch state
if (Sw_pressed_G == 1)
{ Sw_pressed_G = 0;  // Switch state changed to OFF}
else
{ Sw_pressed_G = 1;  // Switch state changed to ON}
// Allow no other changes for ~1 second
Sw_blocked_G = 5;  return;}
// Switch pressed, but not yet for long enough
return; }
// Switch not pressed - reset the count
Sw_press_duration_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.9 Part of an example demonstrating a software-based switch interface
Further reading
—THE USER INTERFACE 422www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 448 ---
MULTI -STATE SWITCH
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you obtain the behaviour illustrated in Figure 19.13 from a single, push-button switch connected to the port pin of a microcontroller?
Background
—
Solution
Although – as discussed in ON-OFF SWITCH [page 414] – sustained switch depressions
can sometimes be problematic, they can also form the basis of more complex switch-based interfaces and can allow us to turn this two-state input device into a three-state(or more) input device.
For example, if we have a real-time clock, we may have just two buttons (‘forward’
and ‘backward’) to set the time. To avoid this process becoming unduly tedious, weMULTI-STATE SWITCH 423
FIGURE  19.13 A three-state switchOFF
ON
STATE 2Switch is pressed
for A msSwitch is released Switch is released
Switch is held for
an additional B msON
STATE 1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 449 ---
might decide that a brief depression of the ‘Forward’ button should slowly increment
the displayed time, while a sustained depression (longer than, say, five seconds),should advance the display more rapidly. 
To implement this type of behaviour, we might operate as follows:
GWe keep track of the period of time over which the switch has been continuallydepressed.
GWhen the depression exceeds a threshold (call it Duration A), we treat this like anormal switch depression.
GWhen the depression exceeds a larger threshold (call it Duration B), we treat this asa sustained switch depression.
Note that further ‘levels’ can be added, but more than two (sometimes three) can
be confusing to the user.
See the example that follows for complete implementation details.
Hardware resource implications
Creating a multi-state switch imposes very minor loads on CPU and memory resources.
Reliability and safety issues
The use of multi-state switches does not generally have reliability or safety implications.
Refer to SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399] and SWITCH INTERFACE
(HARDWARE ) [page 410] for general discussions about the safety of switch interfaces.
Portability
This pattern may be adapted for use with other microcontrollers without difficulty.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A cost-effective way of improving the usability of many applications.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See ON-OFF SWITCH [page 414].
Example: Counter
In this example, we demonstrate the key features of a multi-state switch by means of
a counter that is incremented at a rate which depends on the switch-press duration(Listings 19.10 to 19.14).
The required hardware is illustrated in Figure 19.14.THE USER INTERFACE 424www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 450 ---
The key software files are given in Listings 18.6 to 18.11: a complete set of files for
this example is included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project MULTI_S
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Bargraph.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]// The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if requiredsbit Pin0 = P2^0;sbit Pin1 = P2^1;sbit Pin2 = P2^2;sbit Pin3 = P2^3;sbit Pin4 = P2^4;sbit Pin5 = P2^5;sbit Pin6 = P2^6;sbit Pin7 = P2^7;
// ------ Swit_D.C -------------------------------------------------MULTI-STATE SWITCH 425
FIGURE  19.14 A collection of LEDs used to demonstrate multi-state switchRledRledRledRledRledRledRledRled
8051 devicePort 1LED 7VccULN2803AP2.0 – Pin8
P2.1 – Pin7P2.2 – Pin6P2.3 – Pin5P2.4 – Pin4P2.5 – Pin3P2.6 – Pin2P2.7 – Pin1
Pin11 – LED0
Pin12 – LED1Pin13 – LED2Pin14 – LED3Pin15 – LED4Pin16 – LED5Pin17 – LED6Pin18 – LED7
LED 6 LED 5 LED 4 LED 3 LED 2 LED 1 LED 0For 25mA LEDs, Rled = 120 Ohms
9P3^3www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 451 ---
// Connect single push-button switch on this pin (to gnd)
// - debounced in softwaresbit  Sw_pin = P3^3;   // Press this to start adjusting the time
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.10 Part of an example program demonstrating the use of multi-state 
switches
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for MULTI-STATE SWITCH pattern.See Chapter 19 for details.
Required linker options (see text for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (SWITCH_MS_Update, COUNTER_Update), SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (SWITCH_MS_Update, COUNTER_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"#include "Swit_D.h"
#include "2_01_12g.H"#include "Counter.h"#include "Bargraph.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the scheduler SCH_Init_T2();
// Set up the display
BARGRAPH_Init();
// Set up the switch pin
SWITCH_MS_Init();
// Add a 'SWITCH_MS_Update' task, every ~200 ms
// - timings are in ticks (50 ms tick interval - see Sch 'init' function)
SCH_Add_Task(SWITCH_MS_Update, 0, 4);THE USER INTERFACE 426www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 452 ---
// Add a 'COUNTER_Update' task every ~1000 ms
SCH_Add_Task(COUNTER_Update, 0, 20);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.11 Part of an example program demonstrating the use of multi-state 
switches
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Bargraph.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple bargraph library.  See Chapter 10.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Bargraph.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The data to be displayed
extern tByte Data_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define BARGRAPH_ON (1)
#define BARGRAPH_OFF (0)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// These  variables store the thresholds
// used to update the displaystatic tBargraph M9_1_G;static tBargraph M9_2_G;static tBargraph M9_3_G;MULTI-STATE SWITCH 427www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 453 ---
static tBargraph M9_4_G;
static tBargraph M9_5_G;static tBargraph M9_6_G;static tBargraph M9_7_G;static tBargraph M9_8_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
BARGRAPH_Init()Prepare for the bargraph display.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void BARGRAPH_Init(void)
{Pin0 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin1 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin2 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin3 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin4 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin5 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin6 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   Pin7 = BARGRAPH_OFF;   
// Use a linear scale to display data 
// Remember: *9* possible output states// - do all calculations ONCEM9_1_G = (BARGRAPH_MAX - BARGRAPH_MIN) / 9;M9_2_G = M9_1_G * 2;M9_3_G = M9_1_G * 3;M9_4_G = M9_1_G * 4;M9_5_G = M9_1_G * 5;M9_6_G = M9_1_G * 6;M9_7_G = M9_1_G * 7;M9_8_G = M9_1_G * 8;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
BARGRAPH_Update()
Update the bargraph display.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void BARGRAPH_Update(void)
{tBargraph Data = Data_G - BARGRAPH_MIN; THE USER INTERFACE 428www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 454 ---
Pin0 = ((Data >= M9_1_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);
Pin1 = ((Data >= M9_2_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin2 = ((Data >= M9_3_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin3 = ((Data >= M9_4_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin4 = ((Data >= M9_5_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin5 = ((Data >= M9_6_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin6 = ((Data >= M9_7_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);Pin7 = ((Data >= M9_8_G) == BARGRAPH_ON);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.12 Part of an example program demonstrating the use of multi-state 
switches
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Counter.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 'counter' function, to illustrate use of multi-state
switches.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Counter.h"#include "Bargraph.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tBargraph Data_G;// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern tByte Sw_status_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
COUNTER_Update()Simple counter function (demo purposes).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void COUNTER_Update(void)
{Data_G += Sw_status_G;MULTI-STATE SWITCH 429www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 455 ---
if (Data_G > BARGRAPH_MAX)
{Data_G = 0;}
BARGRAPH_Update();}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.13 Part of an example program demonstrating the use of multi-state 
switches
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWIT_D.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
4-state switch interface code, with software debounce.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Swit_D.h"// ------ Public variables -----------------------------------------tByte Sw_status_G; // The current switch status
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// SW_THRES must be > 1 for correct debounce behaviour
#define SW_THRES (1)#define SW_THRES_X2 (SW_THRES + SW_THRES + SW_THRES + SW_THRES)#define SW_THRES_X3 (SW_THRES_X2 + SW_THRES_X2)
// Allows NO or NC switch to be used (or other wiring variations)
#define SW_PRESSED (0)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------static tByte Sw_press_duration_G = 0;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_MS_Init()THE USER INTERFACE 430www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 456 ---
Initialization function for the switch library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_MS_Init(void)
{Sw_pin = 1; // Use this pin for input
Sw_status_G = 0;  // Switch is initially OFF
Sw_press_duration_G = 0;  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_MS_Update()
This is the main switch function.  It should be scheduled every
50 - 500 ms.
Alters Sw_press_duration_G depending on duration of switch press.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_MS_Update(void)
{if (Sw_pin == SW_PRESSED)
{Sw_press_duration_G += 1;
if (Sw_press_duration_G > (SW_THRES_X3))
{Sw_press_duration_G = SW_THRES_X3;Sw_status_G = 3;  // Switch has been pressed for a long time...return;} 
if (Sw_press_duration_G > (SW_THRES_X2))
{
Sw_status_G = 2;  // Switch has been pressed for a medium time...
return;}
// SW_THRES must be > 1 for software debounce  
if (Sw_press_duration_G > SW_THRES)
{
Sw_status_G = 1;  // Switch has been pressed for a short time...
return;}MULTI-STATE SWITCH 431www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 457 ---
// switch pressed, but not yet for long enough
Sw_status_G = 0; return; }
// Switch not pressed - reset the count
Sw_press_duration_G = 0;Sw_status_G = 0;  // Switch not pressed...
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 19.14 Part of an example program demonstrating the use of multi-state 
switches
Further reading
—THE USER INTERFACE 432www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 458 ---
Keypad interfaces
Introduction
Keypads are a common component in embedded applications. 
In this chapter, we consider how you can create reliable keypad-based user interfaces.chapter 20www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 459 ---
KEYPAD INTERFACE
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you connect a small keypad, similar to that illustrated in Figure 20.1, to yourapplication?
Background
See Chapter 19 for background information on the reading of single switches.
Solution
Basics
We are concerned here with keypads made up of a matrix of switches, in an arrange-ment similar to that illustrated in Figure 20.2.
Some key points to note are as follows:
GThe matrix arrangement is used to save port pins. If we have R rows and Ccolumns of keys, we need R + C pins if we use a matrix arrangement and R ×C pins
if we use individual switches. If you need six or more keys, then the matrixarrangement requires fewer pins.THE USER INTERFACE 434
FIGURE  20.1 An example of a three-row x three-column keypadBC A
EF D
HI Gwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 460 ---
Many keypads have 12 keys (‘0’–‘9’ plus two function keys – typically ‘#’ and ‘*’).
Using a matrix arrangement, this requires seven port pins.
GThe keys may bounce, when pressed and released. 
GThe duration of the key press will generally be at least 500 ms. 
GThe keys will not generally be allowed to ‘auto repeat’: this can be very confusingfor users.
GWe may wish the user to be able to press one or more ‘function keys’ in combina-tion with other keys. 
Keypad scanning
At the heart of any keypad code is a scanning function: this will typically go througheach column in turn and identify if any key in that column has been pressed.
Consider, for example, the keypad shown in Figure 20.3.In Figure 20.3, the numbers adjacent to the rows and column indicate the port
pins to which the keypad should be connected. Pins 0, 1 and 2 (the columns) will bereferred to here as the output pins: these are written to during the scanning process.Pins 3, 4, 5 and 6 will be referred to as the input pins: these are read during the scan-ning process.KEYPAD INTERFACE 435
FIGURE  20.2 A schematic of a keypad interface
[Note:The pull-up resistors may be omitted, as usual, if the port has internal pull-ups.]R R R+5v (typical)
Input Port
(Column input)Output Port
(Row select)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 461 ---
Suppose we wish to see if the key ‘1’ is pressed. We can proceed as follows:
GWe set the corresponding output pin (in this case, Pin 6) to a Logic 0 value and the
remaining output pins to a Logic 1 value.
GWe read the required input pin (in this case, Pin 0). 
If this pin is a Logic 1, then the key ‘1’ is not pressed: the Logic 1 value is,
instead, obtained via the pull-up resistor on the port pin. 
If this pin is at Logic 0, then the key is being pressed (subject to debounce con-
siderations): the Logic 0 voltage reading results from the Logic 0 voltage output onPin 6.
GWe must repeat the reading (say) 200 ms later, to allow for switch bounce.
We need to repeat this process for every key. Listing 20.1 illustrates one way of per-
forming this scanning for the whole keypad.
#define KEYPAD_PORT P2
sbit C1 = KEYPAD_PORT^0;
sbit C2 = KEYPAD_PORT^1;sbit C3 = KEYPAD_PORT^2;
sbit R1 = KEYPAD_PORT^6;
sbit R2 = KEYPAD_PORT^5;sbit R3 = KEYPAD_PORT^4;sbit R4 = KEYPAD_PORT^3;THE USER INTERFACE 436
FIGURE  20.3 Typical keypad connections
[Note:The numbers adjacent to the keypad rows and columns represent the pin numbers on the port to which the keypad is connected.
Note that no pull-up resistors will generally be needed: refer to Figure 20.2 for details.]012 012456
323 1
56 4
89 7
0# *456
3www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 462 ---
...
bit KEYPAD_Scan(char* const pKey, char* const pFuncKey)
{static data char Old_Key;
char Key = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;
char Fn_key = (char) 0x00;
C1 = 0; // Scanning column 1
if (R1 == 0) Key = '1';if (R2 == 0) Key = '4';if (R3 == 0) Key = '7';if (R4 == 0) Fn_key = '*';
C1 = 1;
C2 = 0; // Scanning column 2
if (R1 == 0) Key = '2';if (R2 == 0) Key = '5';if (R3 == 0) Key = '8';if (R4 == 0) Key = '0';
C2 = 1;
C3 = 0; // Scanning column 3
if (R1 == 0) Key = '3';if (R2 == 0) Key = '6';if (R3 == 0) Key = '9';if (R4 == 0) Fn_key = '#';
C3 = 1;
if (Key == KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA)
{// No key pressed (or just a function key)Old_Key = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;Last_valid_key_G = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;
return 0;  // No new data
}
// A key has been pressed: debounce by checking twice
if (Key == Old_Key)
{// A valid (debounced) key press has been detected
// Must be a new key to be valid - no 'auto repeat'
if (Key != Last_valid_key_G)
{ KEYPAD INTERFACE 437www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 463 ---
// New key!
*pKey = Key;Last_valid_key_G = Key;
// Is the function key pressed too?
if (Fn_key)
{// Function key *is* pressed with another key*pFuncKey = Fn_key;}
else
{*pFuncKey = (char) 0x00;}
return 1;
}
}
// No new data
Old_Key = Key;return 0;}
Listing 20.1 An example of code for keypad scanning
Function keys
Note that more than one key may be pressed at the same time. The ‘function keys’ (‘#’
and ‘*’) in Listing 20.1 illustrate how we can make use of multiple key depressions.
The main code example presented with this pattern illustrate the use of function
keys.
Buffer arrangements
In most scheduled keypad routines, it is useful to have a small buffer, so that keypresses are not lost if the system is unable to process them immediately.
Numerous buffer arrangements are possible: the main code example presented
with this pattern illustrates one possibility.
Hardware resource implications
While it does not require on-chip facilities (such as timers etc.), the keypad scanningprocess imposes both a CPU and memory load.THE USER INTERFACE 438www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 464 ---
Reliability and safety issues
Keypad scanning is a software-based technique, closely related to SWITCH INTERFACE
(SOFTWARE )[page 399]. In a hostile environment, use of a keypad may provide a less
reliable solution than use of a number of individual switches with a hardware inter-face (see 
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )[page 410]).
However, particularly where a large keypad – such as a QWERTY keypad with
around 30 keys – is required, use of separate switches may be impractical. The safestthing to do in such circumstances may be to use a shared-clock scheduler (see Part F),and have a second microcontroller link to the keypad. This ‘keypad microcontroller’should then have a separate power supply, and should be opto-isolated from the mainsystem board.
Portability
This code is highly portable and this approach to keypad scanning is very widely used.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Multiplexed keypads are easy to use and inexpensive.
Because the pattern is software based, minimal protection against ESD and mali-
cious damage (for example) is provided: use of a separate, isolated, keypadprocessor may be necessary if the reliability of the main processor is essential.
In harsh environments, it may be safer to avoid multiplexed keypads and use
individual switches.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )[page 399] and SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )
[page 410].
Example: Keypad library with buffer and fn key support
We present here a complete keypad library for the 8051 family. The library has supportfor function keys (two) and has a buffer facility. The library is intended to work with key-pads as shown in Figure 20.3, but is easily adapted to different keypad layouts and sizes.
The demonstration program runs on an Infineon c515c microcontroller. However,
none of the keypad code is 515 specific: using appropriate versions of the scheduler andthe PC link libraries (included on the CD) it can be used with any 8051 family member.
Figure 20.4 shows a typical program output.The key library files are given in Listings 20.2 to 20.5. Refer to the CD for the com-
plete set of files for this example.KEYPAD INTERFACE 439www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 465 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project Key_232
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Keypad.C ------------------------------------------------
#define KEYPAD_PORT P5sbit C1 = KEYPAD_PORT^0;
sbit C2 = KEYPAD_PORT^1;sbit C3 = KEYPAD_PORT^2;
sbit R1 = KEYPAD_PORT^6;
sbit R2 = KEYPAD_PORT^5;sbit R3 = KEYPAD_PORT^4;sbit R4 = KEYPAD_PORT^3;
// ------ Lnk_O.C -----------------------------------------------
// Pins 3.0 and 3.1 used for RS-232 interfaceTHE USER INTERFACE 440
FIGURE  20.4 Typical output from the keypad input program given in this sectionSerial interface initialized.
Keypad test code – READY1234567890
*1*1#2#5
0982374122www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 466 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 20.2 Part of the software for a keypad interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for keypad library, based on c515cSends output (to PC) over serial (RS232) linkLinker options:OVERLAY (main ~ (PC_LINK_Update, Keypad_RS232_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (PC_LINK_Update, Keypad_RS232_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_10i.h"#include "Lnk_O_B.h"#include "Keypad.h"#include "Keyp_232.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Set baud rate to 9600, using internal baud rate generator
PC_LINK_Init_Internal(9600);
// Prepare the keypad
KEYPAD_Init();
// Prepare the Keypad -> RS232 library
Keypad_RS232_Init();
// We have to schedule this task (~100x a second is enough here)
// - this writes data to PC //// TIMING IS IN TICKS (1 ms tick interval)SCH_Add_Task(PC_LINK_Update, 10, 10);KEYPAD INTERFACE 441www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 467 ---
// Read the keypad every ~50 ms
SCH_Add_Task(Keypad_RS232_Update, 0, 50);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 20.3 Part of the software for a keypad interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Keypad.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple keypad library, for a 3-column x 4-row keypad.Key arrangement is:   ---------
1  2  34  5  67  8  9*  0  #
---------
Supports two function keys ('*' and '#').See Chapter 19 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Keypad.h"// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------bit KEYPAD_Scan(char* const, char* const);// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define KEYPAD_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH 6THE USER INTERFACE 442www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 468 ---
// Any valid character will do - must not match anything on keypad
#define KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA (char) '-' 
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------static char KEYPAD_recv_buffer[KEYPAD_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH+1][2];
static tByte KEYPAD_in_read_index;    // Data in buffer that has been read 
static tByte KEYPAD_in_waiting_index; // Data in buffer not yet read
static char Last_valid_key_G = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
KEYPAD_Init()Init the keypad.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void KEYPAD_Init(void)
{KEYPAD_in_read_index = 0;KEYPAD_in_waiting_index = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
KEYPAD_Update()The main 'update' function for the keypad library.Must schedule this function (approx every 50 - 200 ms).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void KEYPAD_Update(void)
{char Key, FnKey;
// Scan keypad here...
if (KEYPAD_Scan(&Key, &FnKey) == 0)
{// No new key data - just returnreturn;}
// Want to read into index 0, if old data has been read
// (simple ~circular buffer)if (KEYPAD_in_waiting_index == KEYPAD_in_read_index)
{ KEYPAD_in_waiting_index = 0;KEYPAD_in_read_index = 0;} KEYPAD INTERFACE 443www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 469 ---
// Load keypad data into buffer
KEYPAD_recv_buffer[KEYPAD_in_waiting_index][0] = Key;KEYPAD_recv_buffer[KEYPAD_in_waiting_index][1] = FnKey;if (KEYPAD_in_waiting_index < KEYPAD_RECV_BUFFER_LENGTH)
{// Increment without overflowing bufferKEYPAD_in_waiting_index++;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
KEYPAD_Get_Char_From_Buffer()
The Update function copies data into the keypad buffer.  
This extracts data from the buffer.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit KEYPAD_Get_Data_From_Buffer(char* const pKey, char* const pFuncKey)
{// If there is new data in the bufferif (KEYPAD_in_read_index < KEYPAD_in_waiting_index)
{*pKey = KEYPAD_recv_buffer[KEYPAD_in_read_index][0];*pFuncKey = KEYPAD_recv_buffer[KEYPAD_in_read_index][1];
KEYPAD_in_read_index++;return 1;
}
return 0;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Function: KEYPAD_Clear_Buffer()
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void KEYPAD_Clear_Buffer(void)
{KEYPAD_in_waiting_index = 0;KEYPAD_in_read_index = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
KEYPAD_Scan()THE USER INTERFACE 444www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 470 ---
This function is called from scheduled keypad function.
Must be edited as required to match your key labels.Includes two 'function keys' which may be used simultaneously
with keys from any other column.  
Adapt as required!
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit KEYPAD_Scan(char* const pKey, char* const pFuncKey)
{static data char Old_Key;
char Key = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;
char Fn_key = (char) 0x00;
C1 = 0; // Scanning column 1
if (R1 == 0) Key = '1';if (R2 == 0) Key = '4';if (R3 == 0) Key = '7';if (R4 == 0) Fn_key = '*';
C1 = 1;
C2 = 0; // Scanning column 2
if (R1 == 0) Key = '2';if (R2 == 0) Key = '5';if (R3 == 0) Key = '8';if (R4 == 0) Key = '0';
C2 = 1;
C3 = 0; // Scanning column 3
if (R1 == 0) Key = '3';if (R2 == 0) Key = '6';if (R3 == 0) Key = '9';if (R4 == 0) Fn_key = '#';
C3 = 1;
if (Key == KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA)
{// No key pressed (or just a function key)Old_Key = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;Last_valid_key_G = KEYPAD_NO_NEW_DATA;
return 0;  // No new data
}
// A key has been pressed: debounce by checking twice
if (Key == Old_Key)KEYPAD INTERFACE 445www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 471 ---
{
// A valid (debounced) key press has been detected
// Must be a new key to be valid - no 'auto repeat'
if (Key != Last_valid_key_G)
{ // New key!*pKey = Key;Last_valid_key_G = Key;
// Is the function key pressed too?
if (Fn_key)
{// Function key *is* pressed with another key*pFuncKey = Fn_key;
}
else
{*pFuncKey = (char) 0x00;}
return 1;
}
}
// No new data
Old_Key = Key;return 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 20.4 Part of the software for a keypad interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Keyp_232.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple demonstration function for transferring keypad inputs to
PC via serial (RS232) link. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/THE USER INTERFACE 446www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 472 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "Keypad.h"#include "Keyp_232.h"#include "Lnk_O.h"
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------tByte Count_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Keypad_RS232_Init()
Init function for simple library displaying keypad inputs
over serial link.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Keypad_RS232_Init(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Keypad test code - READY\n");Count_G = 0;
KEYPAD_Clear_Buffer();
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Keypad_RS232_Update()Function for displaying keypad inputs over serial link.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Keypad_RS232_Update(void)     
{char Key, FnKey;
// Update the keypad buffer
KEYPAD_Update();
// Is there any new data in the keypad buffer?
if (KEYPAD_Get_Data_From_Buffer(&Key, &FnKey) == 0)
{// No new data.return;}
// Function key has been pressed (with another key)
if (FnKey)
{KEYPAD INTERFACE 447www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 473 ---
PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer('\n');
PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(FnKey);PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(Key);PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer('\n');
Count_G = 0;
}
else
{// An ordinary key (no function key) has been pressedPC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(Key);
if (++Count_G == 10) 
{PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer('\n');Count_G = 0;}
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/ 
Listing 20.5 Part of the software for a keypad interface
Example: Keypad and LCD
See Chapter 22 for a complete example of a keypad and LCD interface design.
Further reading
—THE USER INTERFACE 448www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 474 ---
Multiplexed LED displays
Introduction
Many embedded applications contain user interfaces assembled from multi-segment
LED displays. 
In this chapter, we consider how such displays may be interfaced to the 8051
family of microcontrollers.chapter 21www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 475 ---
THE USER INTERFACE 450
MX LED DISPLAY
Context
G You are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user-interface for your application.
Problem
How do you display information on one or more multi-segment LED displays?
Background
We consider some essential background material in this section.
What is a multi-segment LED?
Multiple LEDs are often arranged as multi-segment displays: combinations of eightsegments (see Figure 21.1) and similar seven-segment displays (without a decimalpoint) are particularly common.
Such displays are arranged either as ‘common cathode’ or ‘common anode’ pack-
ages: the connection of the LEDs within each package is illustrated in Figure 21.2.
In either case, in addition to the common pin, we must provide appropriate signals
to each of the LEDs in order to generate the digits we require (see ‘Solution’). 
The required current per segment varies from about 2 mA (very small displays) to
about 60 mA (very large displays, 100mm or more).
FIGURE  21.1 The segments of what is often referred to as a seven-segment display
[Note: that, as here, a decimal point will frequently also be included, so that this ‘seven-segment’ display actually has eight segm ents.]a
def
cbgwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 476 ---
Basic hardware requirements (driving a single digit)
For reasons that we discussed in IC BUFFER [page 118], we cannot generally connect a
multi-segment LED directly to a microcontroller port as illustrated in Figure 21.3.As you will recall, this is because the port cannot safely handle the required current(typically around 80 mA per digit).
In most cases, we require some form of buffer or driver IC between the port and
the MS LED. 
For small displays (around 9 mA per segment), the simple 240 and 241 buffers (see
IC BUFFER [page 118]) are a cost-effective solution. Figure 21.4 shows a 74x241 (non-
inverting buffer) used to drive a single, eight-segment LED display. Note that a74x240 (inverting) buffer can be used as an alternative.
In most circumstances (such as the multiplexed displays we will focus on here), the
basic 240 / 241 buffers have insufficient current capacity and an IC driver chip willgenerally be used. For example, Figure 21.5 shows a single common cathode LED digitconnected to a single port via another octal buffer: the UDN2585A. As we discussedMX LED DISPLAY 451
FIGURE  21.2 The internal arrangement of common cathode and common anode LED displays
[Note: that there are eight segments because we assume the presence of a decimal point.]Cathode (–)Anode (+)
FIGURE  21.3 Attempting to drive a common anode display directly from a microcontroller port
[Note: in most cases, this will not work.]e Port X.4d Port X.3c Port X.2b Port X.1a Port X.0
f Port X.5
g Port X.6
dp Port X.7
Rwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 477 ---
THE USER INTERFACE 452
FIGURE  21.4 Using a 74x241 to drive a multi-segment LED display
[Note: that, in some displays, a different resistor value may be required to drive the decimal point: check your data sheet. Note al so that,
as we discussed in IC BUFFER [page 118], we do not require pull-up resistors at the buffer output if CMOS logic is used.]ba
g
dp
RVcc
c
74×241 8051 devicePX.7
PX.0
R =Vcc – Vdiode
I diodeNote: All resistor values may not be the same
(the decimal point may require a different value)
FIGURE  21.5 Using a UDN 2585A to drive an LED display
[Note: that this is an inverting (current source) buffer. Logic 0 on the input line will light the corresponding LED segment.]ba
g
dp
RVcc
c
UDN
2585APX.0
PX.79
10www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 478 ---
in IC DRIVER [page 134], each of the (eight) channels in this device can simultane-
ously source up to 120 mA of current (at up to 25V): this is enough, for example, foreven the largest of LED displays. 
Here, the output of the 2585 in response to a Logic 0 input will be approximately
Vcc. As a result, the resistor values are again calculated as shown in Figure 21.4.
Hardware for multiple digits
As discussed in ‘Background’, driving a single multi-segment display is straightfor-
ward. Suppose, however, that we need to drive four digits, perhaps for a simple digitalclock. To do so using the approach discussed in ‘Background’ would require four spareports. In many applications, you will not have four ports available. In addition, to usefour ports often requires a separate driver (buffer) circuit and resistor pack for eachdigit: this can significantly increase the system cost.
The most common solution, discussed here, is to multiplex the displays. This means
that (in this example) we drive each display for only a quarter of the time: as long as wecycle around all of the displays at between 20 and 50 Hz, the user will not generallynotice that the displays are not being simultaneously driven. Even with a simple imple-mentation, this basic approach allows us to drive up to eight LEDs (each with decimalpoints) using only two ports. More commonly, this allows us to drive four LED digitsusing 12 port pins. As in many 8051 applications (even those using external memory)Port 1 and most of Port 3 are available, this approach can be used in many applications.
A simple circuit suitable for creating a cost-effective multiplexed display is shown
in Figure 21.6. Here, the information required to drive each digit is supplied on PortX, while the selection of the digits is controlled by Port Y. 
Note that Port Y must control (sink) the current coming from eight individual
LEDs: this may be up to around 140 mA, even for a collection of small displays andMX LED DISPLAY 453
FIGURE  21.6 Multiplexing four (common cathode) LED modulesba
dp
RVcc
cUDN2585APX.7
PX.09
10
ULN2803A18 17 16 15
23 4 98051
micro-
controller
PY.01PY.3
Logic 1 here
to activate digitwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 479 ---
can approach 500 mA for large (100 mm) displays. As a result, we cannot directly
drive the displays from a port, but must use, for example, a ULN 2003 or 2803 as a(sink) buffer. Note that you can replace the 2003 / 2803 (or equivalent) with four NPNtransistors (e.g. 2N2222), but this is seldom cost-effective.
You will also need a buffer on Port X to source sufficient current: the UDN 2585A
is, again, a good choice here. Use of such a source buffer is often essential, since – toachieve a bright display – we usually supply up to four times the normal display cur-rent, for a quarter of the time (thus keeping the average current at the required value).Your microcontroller will have a greatly reduced life if you try to provide this currentfrom the naked chip. 
Again, the values of R in Figure 21.6 are calculated as shown in Figure 21.4. In this
case, it can be helpful to use a ‘resistor pack’ to implement the circuit: such packscontain seven or eight resistors, in a standard (dual in line: DIL or similar) package.
Solution
We consider here both the software codes required to display digits on the displayand the refresh rates needed for flicker-free operation.
Basic software
The software to control the LED digits in arrangements like those shown in Figures21.4 and 21.5 is easy to write. If, for example, we connect the display to Port 3, wecan control it by simply writing:
P3 = code;
Here, ‘code’ is a numerical representation of the required segment activations. The
data required to display the digits 0–9, with or without a following decimal point, aregiven in Listing 21.1.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ConnectionsDP   G    F    E    D    C    B    A =   LED display pins
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
x.7  x.6  x.5  x.4  x.3  x.2  x.1  x.0    =   Port pins
LED codes (NB - positive logic assumed here)0  = abcdef  => 00111111 = 0x3F
1  = bc      => 00000110 = 0x062  = abdeg   => 01011011 = 0x5B3  = abcdg   => 01001111 = 0x4F4  = bcfg    => 01100110 = 0x665  = acdfg   => 01101101 = 0x6D6  = acdefg  => 01111101 = 0x7DTHE USER INTERFACE 454www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 480 ---
MX LED DISPLAY 455
7  = abc     => 00000111 = 0x07
8  = abcdefg => 01111111 = 0x7F9  = abcdfg  => 01101111 = 0x6F
To display decimal point, add 10 (decimal) to the above values
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/// Lookup table - stored in code area (ROM)tByte code LED_Table_G[20] = 
// 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9{0x3F, 0x06, 0x5B, 0x4F, 0x66, 0x6D, 0x7D, 0x07, 0x7F, 0x6F,// 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0xBF, 0x86, 0xDB, 0xCF, 0xE6, 0xED, 0xFD, 0x87, 0xFF, 0xEF};
// -----------------------------------------------------------------
Listing 21.1 Codes that may be used to display data on multi-segment LED displays
Controlling more than one digit per port (Software issues)
We need to update all the displays at a rate of approximately 50 Hz, if we can: if nec-
essary, rates as low as 20 Hz will do. If we have N LED modules, each will be active forapproximately 1/N of the time. Note that, if you choose to drive the displays at highcurrent values, the timing needs to be reasonably accurate, otherwise you may reducethe life of the display and driver components by exposing them to excessively highcurrents for sustained periods.
Overall, for a typical four-module display, we aim to update one module at least
every 5 milliseconds. This is easy to achieve using a suitable scheduler, as we demon-strate in the examples that follow.
Hardware resource implications
All the examples here require the use of a scheduler. The main resource implication isthat, to update (say) four digits, you need a scheduler with a tick interval of around 5ms. This is not usually a limiting factor. Overall, the LED update code will consumeonly around 1% of the CPU time in a typical application, since – although frequent –it is a simple and fast operation. 
The memory requirements are minimal.A substantial number of port pins are required.
Reliability and safety implications
LEDs are not visible in bright light and, as such, must be used with care if they aredisplaying safety-related information. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 481 ---
THE USER INTERFACE 456
For multiplexed displays, you must ensure that the application (or scheduler)
cannot become locked: if it does, the display will very quickly be destroyed by highcurrent values. Thus, if a poorly designed task blocks the scheduler, even for a few sec-onds, and delays a display update (usually scheduled around 20 to 50 Hz), you willprobably destroy the display. Whatever happens, you need to ensure that such anevent will not impact on the general operation of the microcontroller and, therefore,completely destroy the application.
Portability
These techniques are easily ported across members of the 8051 family and to anyother processor family. No features unique to the 8051 are employed.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Multi-segment LED displays are reliable and cheap.
The techniques discussed in this pattern are easy to apply and highly portable.A typical interface requires a substantial number of port pins: up to 12 pins for a
multiplexed 4-digit display.
Displays are not visible in bright sunlight. Provide an additional audible warning
if necessary.
Multiplexed displays can suffer from reliability problems if the scheduling is not
handled correctly.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
There are numerous ‘intelligent’ LED drivers, such as the Maxim 7219, that can dealwith the task of driving and multiplexing LED displays for you. These usually have aserial interface and, as a result, require few port pins. This can be a useful solution ifport availability is limited.
Another way of reducing port requirements is to use a version of the 74x247, BCD-
to-7-segment decoder IC as an interface to your displays, as illustrated in Figure 21.7.The main problem with this approach is that the 74x247 is no longer widely avail-able. If you can find a good supply and are assured of future supplies, this device iseasy to use: consult the data sheet for details.
Another alternative, if lack of ports is a problem, is to use an additional Small 8051
in your design. This chip will then be responsible for the display multiplexing andupdates: data can be easily transferred to such a device using a serial interface and ashared-clock scheduler (Figure 21.8). Shared-clock schedulers are discussed in Part F.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 482 ---
MX LED DISPLAY 457
FIGURE  21.7 Driving two multi-segment LED displays from a single port using 74x247 BCD decodersba
gVcc
c 74×247
BCD-to-7-
segment
decoder
ba
gc 74×247
BCD-to-7
segment
decoder8051
FIGURE  21.8 Using a shared-clock scheduler and two 8051 microcontrollers to provide rapid updates of
an LED displayDisplay microcontroller
(e.g. Atmel 89CX051)Main
microcontroller
board
(any 8051)Serial
(RS232)
linkwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 483 ---
Example: Displaying elapsed time on a multiplexed (4-digit)
LED display 
A common use for LED displays is to display the time. This simple example demon-
strates the display of elapsed time on four multiplexed LEDs. The code is written for astandard 8051 (8052) device.
The required hardware is illustrated in Figure 21.6.The key source files for this example follow (Listings 21.2 to 21.5): all the files
required in this example are included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project LED_TIME
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ LED_MX4.C -----------------------------------------------// LED connection requires 12 port pins
#define LED_DATA_PORT (P2)
/* Connections to LED_DATA_PORT - See Figure 21.6 for details
DP   G    F  E    D    C   B   A    =   LED display pins
|    |    |  |    |    |   |   |
x.7  x.6  x.5  x.4  x.3  x.2  x.1  x.0   =   Port pins
x.7 == LED_DATA_PORT^7, etc
LED codes (NB - positive logic assumed here)0  = abcdef  => 00111111 = 0x3F
1  = bc      => 00000110 = 0x062  = abdeg   => 01011011 = 0x5B3  = abcdg   => 01001111 = 0x4FTHE USER INTERFACE 458www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 484 ---
4  = bcfg    => 01100110 = 0x66
5  = acdfg   => 01101101 = 0x6D6  = acdefg  => 01111101 = 0x7D7  = abc     => 00000111 = 0x078  = abcdefg => 01111111 = 0x7F9  = abcdfg  => 01101111 = 0x6F
To display decimal point, add 10 (decimal) to the above values  */
// Any combination of (4) pins on any ports may be used here
sbit LED_DIGIT_0 = P3^3;sbit LED_DIGIT_1 = P3^4;sbit LED_DIGIT_2 = P3^5;sbit LED_DIGIT_3 = P3^6;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 21.2 Part of an example that displays elapsed time on four multiplexed LED 
displays
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration program for:Program driving 4 multiplexed multi-segment LED displays
- displays elapsed time.
Required linker options (see Chapter 13 for details):OVERLAY 
(main ~ (CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,LED_MX4_Display_Update), SCH_dispatch_tasks !(CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,LED_MX4_Display_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h" #include "LED_Mx4.h"#include "Cloc_Mx4.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */MX LED DISPLAY 459www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 485 ---
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Add the 'Time Update' task (once per second)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,100,10);
// Add the 'Display Update' task (once per second)
// Need to update a 4-segment display every 3 ms (approx)// Need to update a 2-segment display every 6 ms (approx)SCH_Add_Task(LED_MX4_Display_Update,0,3);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 21.3 Part of an example that displays elapsed time on four multiplexed LED 
displays
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cloc_Mx4.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple library function for keeping track of elapsed time This version for (Mx) LED display
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Cloc_Mx4.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------THE USER INTERFACE 460www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 486 ---
extern tByte LED_Mx4_Data_G[4];
extern tByte code LED_Table_G[20];
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------// Time variables
static tByte Hou_G, Min_G, Sec_G; 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
CLOCK_LED_Time_Update()Updates the global time variables.*** Must be scheduled once per second ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void CLOCK_LED_Time_Update(void)     
{bit Min_update = 0;bit Hou_update = 0;
if (++Sec_G == 60)  
{ Sec_G = 0;Min_update = 1;
if (++Min_G == 60)  
{Min_G = 0;Hou_update = 1;
if (++Hou_G == 24)  
{ Hou_G = 0;}
}
}
if (Min_update)
{// Need to update the minutes data// (both digits)LED_Mx4_Data_G[1] = LED_Table_G[Min_G / 10];LED_Mx4_Data_G[0] = LED_Table_G[Min_G % 10];}
// We don't display seconds in this version.
// We simply use the seconds data to turn on and off the decimalMX LED DISPLAY 461www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 487 ---
// point between hours and minutes 
if ((Sec_G % 2) == 0)
{LED_Mx4_Data_G[2] = LED_Table_G[Hou_G % 10];}
else
{LED_Mx4_Data_G[2] = LED_Table_G[(Hou_G % 10) + 10];}
if (Hou_update)
{// Need to update the 'tens of hours' dataLED_Mx4_Data_G[3] = LED_Table_G[Hou_G / 10];}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 21.4 Part of an example that displays elapsed time on four multiplexed LED 
displays
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Mx4.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple library function for displaying data on four multiplexed,
eight-segment LED displays
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h" 
#include "Port.h"
#include "LED_Mx4.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Lookup table - stored in code area
// See Port.H for connections and code details
tByte code LED_Table_G[20] = 
// 0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7     8    9{0x3F, 0x06, 0x5B, 0x4F, 0x66, 0x6D, 0x7D, 0x07, 0x7F, 0x6F,THE USER INTERFACE 462www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 488 ---
// 0.   1.   2.   3.    4.    5.   6.    7.   8.   9.
0xBF, 0x86, 0xDB, 0xCF, 0xE6, 0xED, 0xFD, 0x87, 0xFF, 0xEF};
// Global data formatted for display (initially 0,0,0,0)
tByte LED_Mx4_Data_G[4] = {0x3F,0x3F,0x3F,0x3F};
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------
static tByte Digit_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_MX4_Display_Update()Updates (four) multiplexed 8-segment LED displays.Usually aim to scheduled at around 3 ms intervals: typically
around a 1% CPU load on basic 8051.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_MX4_Display_Update(void)
{// Increment the digit to be displayedif (++Digit_G == LED_NUM_DIGITS)
{Digit_G = 0;}
// Allows any pins to be used
switch (Digit_G)
{case 0:
{      LED_DIGIT_0 = 0;LED_DIGIT_1 = 0;LED_DIGIT_2 = 0;LED_DIGIT_3 = 1;break;}
case 1:
{      LED_DIGIT_0 = 0;LED_DIGIT_1 = 0;LED_DIGIT_2 = 1;LED_DIGIT_3 = 0;break;}MX LED DISPLAY 463www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 489 ---
case 2:
{      LED_DIGIT_0 = 0;LED_DIGIT_1 = 1;LED_DIGIT_2 = 0;LED_DIGIT_3 = 0;break;}
case 3:
{      LED_DIGIT_0 = 1;LED_DIGIT_1 = 0;LED_DIGIT_2 = 0;LED_DIGIT_3 = 0;}
}
LED_DATA_PORT = 255 - LED_Mx4_Data_G[Digit_G];
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 21.5 Part of an example that displays elapsed time on four multiplexed LED 
displays
Further reading
—THE USER INTERFACE 464www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 490 ---
Controlling LCD panels 
Introduction
We considered the creation of LED-based user interfaces in Chapter 21. Here we are
concerned with the use of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) in such interfaces.
Unlike LEDs, LCDs are based on passive display technology: this means that LCDs
control the passage of light rather than emitting light. This fact directly contributes tothe low power consumption of these devices: large (5V) panels require up to 5 mA: atotal power consumption of up to 25 mW, excluding any backlight. Small panels con-sume around half this power. Since a single LED has a very similar power consumption,
use of LCD displays in battery-powered embedded systems is particularly popular.
While various types of LCD display are available, they can be divided into two
basic groups: graphics displays and text displays. Notebook (and increasingly desktop)PCs use sophisticated graphics displays, made up of many thousands of individual‘picture elements’ (pixels). Such displays are expensive in their own right and gener-ally require large amounts of memory (typically several megabytes) and powerfulprocessors for efficient operation. As we have seen, the type of embedded devices weare concerned with in this book do not usually justify this level of expense. Instead,we will be concerned here with small displays intended primarily to display text.
Various types of LCD-based character displays are available. These are typically
arranged as one, two or four lines of between 16 and 40 characters. Inevitably, thelarger displays are more expensive and consume more power. Each LCD character isusually a 5x8 matrix of dots: less commonly, a 5x11 matrix is also used: note that, ineach case, the characters themselves are 5x7 and 5x10 pixels in size, with the bottomline being reserved for the cursor. To generate characters on such displays would tendto consume a large percentage of the available CPU time (and most of the ports oraddress space) on most embedded processors. As a result, most LCD panels include anon-board controller to deal with this: this is generally a variant on the Hitachichapter 22www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 491 ---
HD44780. Displays based on this popular controller all have very similar hardware
interfaces and will display the same mixture of English (or Japanese) characters.  
We focus on LCD panels based on this ‘standard’ controller in the pattern LCD
CHARACTER PANEL presented in this chapter. 
Please note that much of the background material presented here is adapted from
the Hitachi HD44780 data sheet. THE USER INTERFACE 466www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 492 ---
LCD CHARACTER PANEL
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GYou are creating the user interface for your application.
Problem
How do you connect an LCD-based ‘character panel’ display to your embeddedprocessor and control it efficiently using a high-level programming language?
Background
As outlined at the start of this chapter, we are concerned here with LCD character
panels based on the HD44780 microcontroller. 
Key HD44780 components
The HD44780 contains its own reset circuitry, memory and so forth: it contains sev-
eral important components (Figure 22.1), which may be accessed and controlled froman attached microcontroller or microprocessor. We will discuss some of the key com-ponents in the sections that follow.
As shown in Figure 22.1, the interface between the microcontroller and the
HD44780 consists of five sets of signals. A summary of each of these signals is givenin Table 22.1.
DD RAM
At the heart of the HD44780 is the DD RAM: the ‘Display Data’ RAM. This stores dis-play data represented in 8-bit character codes. Its capacity is 80 characters; as a resultthe maximum display sizes are 20 charactersx4 lines or 40 charactersx2 lines.
Use of the HD44780 involves transferring data (via the 4-bit or 8-bit data bus) into
the DD RAM. The HD44780 will then refresh the display as required using these data. 
Characters that can be stored and displayed via DD RAM include most of the core
(displayable) characters from the ASCII table, with only minor changes (Table 22.2):this means that, in general, you can simply send character data to the display andobtain the expected outputs.
Note that none of these characters uses the bottom line of the display (the cursor
line): as a result, low-case characters with ‘tails’ (g, j, p, q, y) will appear higher thannormal on the display.LCD CHARACTER PANEL 467www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 493 ---
THE USER INTERFACE 468
FIGURE  22.1 Key components in the Hitachi HD44780. Microcontroller / midroprocessor interfaceBusy flagCG RAM
DD RAMCursor and
blink controller
Address
counter
RSR/––WE DB0 to
DB3DB4 to
DB7LCD interface
TABLE 22.1 The HD44780 interface
Signal Number of lines Input and / Function
or output?
RS 1 I Selects instruction register (0) or data register (1)
R /W 1 I Selects read (1) or write (0)
E 1 I Starts data read/write
DB4 to DB7 4 I/O Used for data transfer between the 8051 and 
the HD44780. DB7 can be used as a busy flag
(not used in the code samples here)
DB0 to DB3 4 I/O Used for data transfer and receive between the
8051 and the HD44780. These pins are notused during 4-bit operation (not used in the 
code samples here)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 494 ---
[Most of this follows the ASCII code: however, note the Yen symbol (Character 0x5C) in place of ‘\’, and that 0x7E and 0x7F are  left and
right arrows, respectively. UK users should also note that there is no ‘£’ symbol (character 0x23 is ‘#’).]
While the character codes are straightforward, knowing which address to write the
data to is slightly less straightforward. There are a number of different configurationsof display available (including 16 characters x1 line, 16x2, 20x2, 20x4, 24x1, 24x2,40x1, 40x2). The memory locations for each of the segments on these displays areshown in Table 22.3.LCD CHARACTER PANEL 469
0123 4567 89 ABCD EF
2X !"#$ % & ' () *+, -. /
3X 0123 4567 89 : ; < =>?
4X @ABC DE FG H I J K L M N O
5X PQRS TUV WXY Z [ ¥ ]^_
6X ` a b cd ef ghi jklm n o
7X pq r s tuvw xy z { | } →←TABLE 22.2 The basic character set in the HD44780
TABLE 22.3 Memory locations for the start of each line in various possible HD44780 LCD displays
#characters #lines Top line Second line Third line Fourth line
16 (8) 1 (2) 0 ×00 – 0 ×07 0 ×40 – 0 ×47 - -
16 2 0 ×00 – 0 ×0F 0 ×40 – 0 ×4F - -
16 4 0 ×00 – 0 ×0F 0 ×40 – 0 ×4F 0 ×10 – 0 ×1F 0 ×50 – 0 ×5F
20 2 0 ×00 – 0 ×13 0 ×40 – 0 ×53 - -
20 4 0 ×00 – 0 ×13 0 ×40 – 0 ×53 0 ×14 – 0 ×27 0 ×54 – ×x67
24 1 0 ×00 – 0 ×17 - - -
24 2 0 ×00 – 0 ×17 0 ×40 – 0 ×58 - -
40 (20) 1 (2) 0 ×00 – 0 ×13 0 ×40 – 0 ×53 - -
40 2 0 ×00 – 0 ×27 0 ×40 – 0 ×67 - -www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 495 ---
CG RAM
The CG RAM is the ‘Character Generator’ RAM: this can be used to allow the creation
and display of user-defined characters. This facility is helpful if you wish to displaycharacters outside the ‘standard’ range, such as a ‘£’ sign.
We demonstrate how to use CG RAM in an example that follows.
Registers
The HD44780 has two 8-bit registers, an instruction register (IR) and a data register (DR):
GThe IR stores instruction codes, such as display clear and cursor shift and addressinformation for DDRAM and character generator CGRAM. 
GThe DR temporarily stores data to be written into DDRAM or CGRAM. Data writteninto the DR from the 8051 are automatically written into DDRAM or CGRAM byan internal operation. 
Busy flag (BF)
When the busy flag is 1, the HD44780 is performing an internal operation and fur-ther instructions or data will not be accepted. When RS = 0 and R/W = 1 (Table 22.4),the busy flag is output to DB7. 
Cursor/blink control circuit
As the name suggests, the cursor/blink control circuit generates the cursor or character
blinking. The cursor or the blinking will appear with the digit located at the displaydata RAM (DDRAM) address set in the address counter (AC). For example, when theaddress counter is 0x08, the cursor position is displayed at DDRAM address 0x08.
Address counter (AC)
The address counter (AC) assigns addresses to both DDRAM and CGRAM. When anaddress of an instruction is written into the IR, the address information is sent fromthe IR to the AC. 
Selection of either DDRAM or CGRAM is also determined concurrently by the
instruction. THE USER INTERFACE 470
TABLE 22.4 Register selection
RS R/W Operation
0 0 IR write as an internal operation (display clear etc.)
0 1 Read busy flag (DB7) and address counter (DB0 to DB6)
1 0 DR write as an internal operation (DR to DDRAM or CGRAM)
1 1 DR read as an internal operation (DDRAM or CGRAM to DR)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 496 ---
After writing to DDRAM or CGRAM, the AC is automatically incremented by 1. The
AC contents are then output to DB0 to DB6 when RS = 0 and R/W = 1 (Table 22.4).
Solution
As discussed in ‘Background’, we will consider only LCD devices based on the HitachiHD44780 controller. 
Hardware
The HD44780 can send data in either two 4-bit operations or one 8-bit operation.This feature was probably originally intended to allow connection to both 4-bit and8-bit microcontrollers. However, even with 8-bit microcontrollers (such as the 8051)the 4-bit interface is the most commonly applied, since:
1The 4-bit interface is sufficiently fast for most applications (a single character istransferred in under 0.1 ms).
2It saves four port pins.
We will use a 4-bit interface in our examples.
Despite its name the ‘4-bit’ interface actually requires six port pins: four for the
data bus and (usually) two additional port pins for the control lines (Figure 22.2). LCD CHARACTER PANEL 471
FIGURE  22.2 A 4-bit interface between an HD44780-based LCD panel and an 8051 microcontrollerP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
(module)Reset
moduleVcc (+5V)
6 4 141312115 1 78910R/W Vss DB0 - DB3
DB4 - DB7
P3.2 - P3.5RS  P3.6 E  P3.710 K
LCD panelVcc3Vo
Vcc
2www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 497 ---
In addition to the ground and power connections, you also need to connect the
contrast adjustment pin (Vo). We have successfully used many LCD display by pullingthis pin to ground. However, the recommended contrast adjustment takes the form ofa potentiometer, connected as shown in Figure 22.3.
Back lighting
If the module has a backlight, this will greatly increase the power consumption: checkyour data sheet for details. Before assuming that you require a backlight, try some ofthe modern displays now available: recent devices have greatly improved contrast andvisibility. 
The data bus
The data bus (4-bit) needs to be connected to four port pins with internal pull-upresistors. If using a port (e.g. Port 0) without internal pull-ups, add external 10K pull-ups (to Vcc).
Software
Complete software libraries are given in the examples that follow.
Note that in these examples – as in the RS-232 library – we have implemented the
library as a MULTI -STAGE TASK : each character is written to a buffer and updates of
the LCD display itself are carried out with a scheduled ‘update’ function.
Note also that these examples illustrate the use of user-defined characters.
Hardware resource implications
Uses a number of port pins, plus one timer. 
Reliability and safety issues
LCD displays are reliable and have a long life.THE USER INTERFACE 472
FIGURE  22.3 The recommended contrast adjustment connection
[Note: that, in many cases, a pulling Vo to ground will also work.]Vo+ 5v
10-20 k potwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 498 ---
Portability
This pattern can be applied to any microcontroller family.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
LCDs provide the basis of a professional and flexible user interface. 
The panels are not cheap. Even a ‘4-bit’ interface requires six pins.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
GSee MX LED DISPLAY [page 450]
GSee PC LINK (RS-232) [page 362]
Example: Displaying elapsed time on an LCD
This example displays elapsed time on an LCD character panel (Listings 22.1 to 22.3).
Hardware 
The required hardware is shown in Figure 22.2.
Software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the project LCD_TIME
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ LCD_A.c --------------------------------------------------// NOTE: Any combination of 6 pins may be used (any ports, any order)
// NOTE: Number in [] are pin numbers on *MANY* LCDs  LCD CHARACTER PANEL 473www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 499 ---
sbit LCD_D4 = P3^2; // DB4 [11]
sbit LCD_D5 = P3^3; // DB5 [12]sbit LCD_D6 = P3^4; // DB6 [13]sbit LCD_D7 = P3^5; // DB7 [14]
sbit LCD_RS = P3^6; // Display register select output [4]
sbit LCD_EN = P3^7; // Display enable output [6]
// Connect Vss [1] on LCD to Gnd
// Connect Vcc [2] on LCD to +5V// Connect Vo  [3] on LCD to Gnd// Connect RW  [5] on LCD to Gnd
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 22.1 Part of a demonstration program that displays elapsed time on an LCD 
character panel
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elap_LCD.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple library function for keeping track of elapsed time 
This version for LCD display.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Elap_LCD.h"
#include "LCD_A.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
tByte Hou_G = 0;
tByte Min_G = 0;tByte Sec_G = 0;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
extern char LCD_data_G[LCD_LINES][LCD_CHARACTERS+1];
extern char code CHAR_MAP_G[10];
extern tByte Hou_G, Min_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elapsed_Time_LCD_Init()THE USER INTERFACE 474www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 500 ---
Init function for simple library displaying elapsed time on LCD
character panel.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Elapsed_Time_LCD_Init(void)
{// Set up the initial data to be sent to the LCD// ASSUMES 20 CHARACTER DISPLAYchar* pTime =  "Elapsed time:-      ";tByte c;
for (c = 0; c < LCD_CHARACTERS; c++)
{LCD_data_G[0][c] = pTime[c];
// For demo purposes only
if (c % 2)
{LCD_data_G[1][c] = LCD_UDC_DEGREES_C;}
else
{LCD_data_G[1][c] = LCD_UDC_POUNDS;}
}
LCD_data_G[0][15] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G / 10];
LCD_data_G[0][16] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G % 10];LCD_data_G[0][18] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G / 10];LCD_data_G[0][19] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G % 10];}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Elapsed_Time_LCD_Update()Function for displaying elapsed time on LCD character panel.*** Must be scheduled once per second ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Elapsed_Time_LCD_Update(void)     
{bit Min_update = 0;bit Hou_update = 0;
// Set (for example) to 2 to test - otherwise 60
if (++Sec_G == 60)  
{ Sec_G = 0;Min_update = 1;LCD CHARACTER PANEL 475www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 501 ---
if (++Min_G == 60)  
{Min_G = 0;Hou_update = 1;
if (++Hou_G == 24)  
{ Hou_G = 0;}
}
}
if (Hou_update)
{// Need to update the 'hours' dataLCD_data_G[0][15] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G / 10];LCD_data_G[0][16] = CHAR_MAP_G[Hou_G % 10];Hou_update = 0;}
if (Min_update)
{// Need to update the minutes dataLCD_data_G[0][18] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G / 10];LCD_data_G[0][19] = CHAR_MAP_G[Min_G % 10];Min_update = 0;}
// We don't display seconds in this version.
// We simply use the seconds data to turn on and off the colon// (between hours and minutes) if ((Sec_G % 2) == 0)
{LCD_data_G[0][17] = ' ';}
else
{LCD_data_G[0][17] = ':';}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 22.2 Part of a demonstration program that displays elapsed time on an LCD 
character panelTHE USER INTERFACE 476www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 502 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_A.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
LCD LIBRARY CODE Designed for scheduled operation, 
in this case for a 2-line x 20-character display 
'4-BIT' INTERFACE (uses 6 pins) to standard HD44780-based LCD
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// Hardware resources: 
// Uses T0 (for delays) plus six I/O pins
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "LCD_A.h"
#include "Delay_T0.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// The LCD data
char LCD_data_G[LCD_LINES][LCD_CHARACTERS+1] 
= {" PLEASE WAIT        "," ...                "};
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void LCD_Send_Byte(const tByte, const bit) ;
static void LCD_Create_Character(const tByte, const tByte* const);
static void LCD_SetDDRAM(tByte);  
static void LCD_Delay(void);
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Bitmaps for user-defined characters [for demonstration purposes]// This is a UK Pound (currency) sign
// 765 43210// ... ...11 - 3 (Decimal)// ... ..1.. - 4 // ... .111. - 14 // ... ..1.. - 4 // ... ..1.. - 4 // ... ..1.. - 4 // ... 11111 - 31 // ... ..... - 0 LCD CHARACTER PANEL 477www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 503 ---
const tByte LCD_UDC_Pounds[8] = {3,4,14,4,4,31,0};
// #define LCD_UDC_POUNDS 1 (See LCD_A.H)// This is 'Degrees Celsius' (as in temp. of boiling water = 100oC)// 765 43210// ... .11.. = 12 (Decimal)// ... 1..1. = 18// ... .11.. = 12// ... ...11 = 3// ... ..1.. = 4// ... ..1.. = 4// ... ...11 = 3  // ... ..... - 0 const tByte LCD_UDC_Degrees_C[8] = {12,18,12,3,4,4,3,0};// #define LCD_UDC_DEGREES_C 2 (See LCD_A.H)
#define LCD_INC_ADDR_NO_SCROLL 0x06
#define LCD_CURSOR_OFF 0x08#define LCD_DISPLAY_ON 0x04#define LCD_CLEAR_DISPLAY 0x01#define LCD_8BIT_2LINE_5x8FONT 0x38  // 0011 1000 #define LCD_4BIT_2LINE_5x8FONT 0x28  // 0010 1000
// Define Timer 0 / Timer 1 reload values for ~50 us delay
#define PRELOAD50micros  (65536 - (tWord)((OSC_FREQ /20000)/(OSC_PER_INST)))    #define PRELOAD50microsH (PRELOAD50micros / 256)#define PRELOAD50microsL (PRELOAD50micros % 256)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Init()RATHER SLOW, BUT MANAGES TO INITIALIZE ALL TESTED DISPLAYS 
(and is only called at the start of the program)
NOTE: I suggest you call this function THREE TIMES.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_Init(void)
{tByte loop;tByte l,c;
// Set up the LCD port
LCD_D4 = 1;LCD_D5 = 1;LCD_D6 = 1;LCD_D7 = 1;THE USER INTERFACE 478www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 504 ---
LCD_RS = 1;
LCD_EN = 1;    Hardware_Delay_T0(500);  
LCD_RS = 0;
LCD_EN = 0;    
// Now wait for the display to initialize
// - data sheet says at least 40 msHardware_Delay_T0(400);
// Data sheet says send this instruction 3 times...
for (loop = 0; loop < 3; loop++)
{// Using a 4-bit bus, 2 display lines and a 5x7 dot fontLCD_Send_Byte(LCD_4BIT_2LINE_5x8FONT,0);  Hardware_Delay_T0(100);}
// Increment display address for each character but do not scroll
LCD_Send_Byte(LCD_INC_ADDR_NO_SCROLL,0); Hardware_Delay_T0(50);
// Turn the display on and the cursor off
LCD_Send_Byte((LCD_CURSOR_OFF | LCD_DISPLAY_ON),0); Hardware_Delay_T0(50);
// Clear the display
LCD_Send_Byte(LCD_CLEAR_DISPLAY,0); Hardware_Delay_T0(50);
// Invisible cursor (dummy function call to avoid library error)
LCD_Control_Cursor(0,0,0);Hardware_Delay_T0(200);
// Set up user-defined character(s) - if required
LCD_Create_Character(LCD_UDC_DEGREES_C, LCD_UDC_Degrees_C);Hardware_Delay_T0(200);
LCD_Create_Character(LCD_UDC_POUNDS, LCD_UDC_Pounds);
Hardware_Delay_T0(200);
// Update all characters in the display
for (l = 0; l < LCD_LINES; l++)
{for (c = 0; c < LCD_CHARACTERS; c++)
{LCD_data_G[l][c] = '*';LCD_Update();LCD CHARACTER PANEL 479www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 505 ---
Hardware_Delay_T0(10);
} 
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Update()
This function updates one character in the LCD panel
(if it requires updating).
Duration: ~0.1 ms.
Schedule roughly every 25 ms (2-line x 20-char display) to
force one complete display update every second.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_Update(void) 
{static tByte Line;static tByte Character;
tByte Tests, Data;
bit Update_required;
// Find next character to be updated
Tests = LCD_CHARACTERS * LCD_LINES;do {
if (++Character == LCD_CHARACTERS)
{Character = 0;
if (++Line == LCD_LINES)
{Line = 0;}
}
// Array contents set to \0 after data are written to LCD 
Update_required = (LCD_data_G[Line][Character] != '\0');} while ((Tests-- > 0) && (!Update_required));
if (!Update_required)
{return;  // No data in LCD requires updating}
// Set DDRAM address which character is to be written to
// - Assumes 2 line by 20 character displayTHE USER INTERFACE 480www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 506 ---
// - See Table 22-3 for adjustments needed for other display sizes
if (Line == 0)
{LCD_SetDDRAM(0x00 + Character);  // First line}
else
{LCD_SetDDRAM(0xC0 + Character);  // Second line}
// This is the data for updating
Data = LCD_data_G[Line][Character];
// Send single data byte
LCD_Send_Byte(Data,1);
// Once data has been written to LCD
LCD_data_G[Line][Character] = '\0';  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Send_Byte()This function writes a byte to the LCD panel.Duration < 0.1 ms .Parameters: DATA
The byte to be written to the display.
DATA_FLAG:
If DATA_FLAG == 1, a data byte is sentIf DATA_FLAG == 0, a command byte is sent
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_Send_Byte(const tByte DATA, const bit DATA_FLAG) 
{// Delays *are* needed// [you may find it possible to reduce them on// on some displays]LCD_D4 = 0;LCD_D5 = 0;LCD_D6 = 0;LCD_D7 = 0;LCD_RS = DATA_FLAG; // Data registerLCD_EN = 0;LCD_Delay();LCD CHARACTER PANEL 481www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 507 ---
// Write the data (high nybble)
LCD_D4 = ((DATA & 0x10) == 0x10);LCD_D5 = ((DATA & 0x20) == 0x20);LCD_D6 = ((DATA & 0x40) == 0x40);LCD_D7 = ((DATA & 0x80) == 0x80); 
LCD_Delay();
LCD_EN = 1; // Latch the high nybbleLCD_Delay();LCD_EN = 0;LCD_Delay();LCD_D4 = 0;LCD_D5 = 0;LCD_D6 = 0;LCD_D7 = 0;LCD_RS = DATA_FLAG;LCD_EN = 0;LCD_Delay();
// Write the data (low nybble)
LCD_D4 = ((DATA & 0x01) == 0x01);LCD_D5 = ((DATA & 0x02) == 0x02);LCD_D6 = ((DATA & 0x04) == 0x04);LCD_D7 = ((DATA & 0x08) == 0x08);
LCD_Delay();
LCD_EN = 1; // Latch the low nybbleLCD_Delay();LCD_EN = 0;LCD_Delay();   } 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Control_Cursor()
This function enables or clears the cursor and moves
it to a specified point.
Params:  Visible  - Set if the cursor should be visible.
Blinking - Set if character should be blinkingAddress  - Address (DDRAM) we want to adjust.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/ 
void LCD_Control_Cursor(const bit VISIBLE, const bit BLINKING, 
const tByte ADDRESS) 
{
// Cursor / blinking appears at current DDRAM address THE USER INTERFACE 482www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 508 ---
// - use SetDDRAM() to alter the cursor position
tByte Command = 0x0C;  
if (VISIBLE) 
{Command |= 0x02;}
if (BLINKING) 
{Command |= 0x01;}
LCD_Send_Byte(Command,0);
LCD_SetDDRAM(ADDRESS);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_SetDDRAM()Set the DDRAM to a particular address.
Used to determine where we write to in the LCD RAM and - thus -
whether the text appears on Line 0, Line 1, etc.
See text for details.Params: The DDRAM address we wish to write to. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_SetDDRAM(tByte ADDRESS)
{ADDRESS &= 0x7f;ADDRESS |= 0x80;LCD_Send_Byte(ADDRESS,0);}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Create_Character()
Stores a user-defined character in the CG RAM. Up to 8 characters
may be stored in this way.  Note: characters are assumed to be 5x8 in size: if you need 5x11 characters you will need to adaptthis code.
Parameters: The character data (see start of file) 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_Create_Character(const tByte UDC_ID, 
const tByte* const pUDC_PAT)LCD CHARACTER PANEL 483www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 509 ---
{
tByte Row;  tByte Address;
// Select CG RAM, appropriate address
Address = 0x40 + (UDC_ID << 3);LCD_Send_Byte(Address, 0);  
// Now write the data 
for (Row = 0; Row < 8; Row++)
{ LCD_Send_Byte(pUDC_PAT[Row], 1);}
// Select DD RAM - address 0
Address = 0x80;
// Ensure that next data write is to DDRAM
LCD_Send_Byte(Address, 0);      }                                       
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Delay()This function provides a short delay for the LCD library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_Delay(void)   
{int x;
x++;
x++;x++;}        
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 22.3 Part of a demonstration program that displays elapsed time on an LCD 
character panel
Example: LCD and keypad
In this example we demonstrate a combined LCD–keypad interface (Figure 22.4).THE USER INTERFACE 484www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 510 ---
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 485
FIGURE  22.4 Hardware used to demonstrate a user interface consisting of an LCD display and a small keypadVccP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset
moduleVcc (+5V)
6 4 141312115 1 78910R/W Vss DB0 - DB3
DB4 - DB7
P3.2 - P3.5RS  P3.6 E  P3.710 K
LCD panelVcc
23 1
56 4
89 7
0# *R4-P2.3
R3-P2.4R2-P2.5R1-P2.6
C3-P2.2
C2-P2.1C1-P2.0Vo
3
2www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 511 ---
The key source files for this example follow (Listings 22.4 to 22.6): all of the files
required in this example are included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port file' (see Chapter 10) for the project SCH_TEST.PRJ
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Keypad.C ------------------------------------------------#define KEYPAD_PORT P2sbit C1 = KEYPAD_PORT^0;
sbit C2 = KEYPAD_PORT^1;sbit C3 = KEYPAD_PORT^2;
sbit R1 = KEYPAD_PORT^6;
sbit R2 = KEYPAD_PORT^5;sbit R3 = KEYPAD_PORT^4;sbit R4 = KEYPAD_PORT^3;
// ------ LCD_A.c --------------------------------------------------// NOTE: Any combination of 6 pins may be used (any ports, any order)
// NOTE: Number in [] are pin numbers on *MANY* LCDs  
sbit LCD_D4 = P3^2; // DB4 [11]
sbit LCD_D5 = P3^3; // DB5 [12]sbit LCD_D6 = P3^4; // DB6 [13]sbit LCD_D7 = P3^5; // DB7 [14]
sbit LCD_RS = P3^6; // Display register select output [4]
sbit LCD_EN = P3^7; // Display enable output [6]
// Connect Vss [1] on LCD to Gnd
// Connect Vcc [2] on LCD to +5VTHE USER INTERFACE 486www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 512 ---
// Connect Vo  [3] on LCD to Gnd
// Connect RW  [5] on LCD to Gnd
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 22.4 Part of the software used to demonstrate a user interface consisting of 
an LCD display and a small keypad
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration program for:Keypad - LCD.This version for '8052' / 11.059MHz / 5 ms tickRequired linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (LCD_Update, LCD_KEY_Update), 
SCH_dispatch_tasks ! (LCD_Update, LCD_KEY_Update)))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "2_05_11g.H"
#include "LCD_A.h"#include "Keypad.h"#include "LCD_Key.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Prepare for the tasksLCD_Init();  // 3x!!!LCD_Init();LCD_Init();
KEYPAD_Init();
LCD_KEY_Init();LED_Flash_Init();LCD CHARACTER PANEL 487www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 513 ---
// Set up the scheduler
SCH_Init_T2();
// Update the LCD from LCD buffer
SCH_Add_Task(LCD_Update, 1000, 24);
// Transfer keypad data to the LCD buffer
SCH_Add_Task(LCD_KEY_Update, 2000, 50);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 22.5 Part of the software used to demonstrate a user interface consisting of 
an LCD display and a small keypad
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_Key.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple demonstration function for transferring keypad inputs 
to an LCD display. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Keypad.h"#include "LCD_Key.h"#include "LCD_A.h"// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static tByte Char_G;// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern char LCD_data_G[LCD_LINES][LCD_CHARACTERS+1];/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-THE USER INTERFACE 488www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 514 ---
LCD_KEY_Init()
Init function for simple keypad - LCD library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_KEY_Init(void)
{tByte c;char* pPrompt = "Type on the keypad:      ";
// Clear the keypad buffer
KEYPAD_Clear_Buffer();
// Prepare the display
for (c = 0; c < LCD_CHARACTERS; c++)
{LCD_data_G[0][c] = pPrompt[c];LCD_data_G[1][c] = '*';}
Char_G = 0;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LCD_KEY_Update()Function for displaying keypad inputs on LCD display.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LCD_KEY_Update(void)     
{char Key, FnKey;
KEYPAD_Update();if (KEYPAD_Get_Data_From_Buffer(&Key, &FnKey) == 0)
{// Buffer is emptyreturn;}
// Function key has been pressed (with another key)if (FnKey)
{LCD_data_G[1][Char_G] = FnKey;
if (++Char_G == LCD_CHARACTERS) 
{LCD CHARACTER PANEL 489www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 515 ---
Char_G = 0;
}
} 
LCD_data_G[1][Char_G] = Key;if (++Char_G == LCD_CHARACTERS) 
{Char_G = 0;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/ 
Listing 22.6 Part of the software used to demonstrate a user interface consisting of 
an LCD display and a small keypad
Further reading
—THE USER INTERFACE 490www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 516 ---
Using serial peripherals
In Part E we consider how two powerful and influential serial communication protocols
(‘I2C’ and ‘SPI’) may be utilized in applications with a time-triggered architecture. 
Use of these protocols has two main advantages:
GThey are designed to allow microcontrollers to be linked to a wide range of differentperipherals – memory, displays, ADCs and similar devices – without requiring the useof large numbers of port pins.  
GA common set of software code may be used with all SPI peripherals (for example),reducing the development effort required.
In Chapter 23, we consider the I
2C bus, developed by Philips. I2C is a simple protocol,
and may be easily generated in software. This allows the full range of 8051 devices(including Small 8051s, with very few spare port pins) to communicate with a wide rangeof peripheral devices. 
In Chapter 24, we consider the SPI bus, developed by Motorola. Increasing numbers of
‘Standard’ and ‘Extended’ 8051 devices have hardware support for SPI and we will makeuse of these facilities in Chapter 24.part ewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 517 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 518 ---
Using ‘I2C’ peripherals
Introduction
The I2C bus is a two-wire serial communication bus, originally introduced by Philips
in 1992. I2C is now supported by a wide range of semiconductor manufacturers, with
the result that many different peripheral devices (LCDs, LED displays, EEPROMs, ADCand DAC devices and so on) can be connected to a microcontroller without usinglarge numbers of port pins.
The pattern in this chapter addresses the following problem:
GShould you use the I2C protocol to link your microcontroller to peripheral devices
and, if so, how do you do so?chapter 23www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 519 ---
I2C PERIPHERAL
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
GThe microcontroller in your application will be interfaced to one or more peripher-als, such as a keypad, EEPROM, digital-to-analog converter, or similar device.
Problem
Should you use the I2C protocol to link your microcontroller to peripheral devices
and, if so, how do you do so?
Background
There are five key features of I2C as far as the developer of embedded applications is
concerned:
GI2C is a protocol designed to allow microcontrollers to be linked to a wide range of
different peripherals – memory, displays, ADCs and similar devices – and requiresonly two port pins to connect to (typically) up to 20 peripherals. 
GThere are many I2C peripherals available for purchase ‘off the shelf’.
GI2C is a simple protocol and may be easily generated in software. This allows all
8051 devices to communicate with a wide range of peripheral devices. 
GA common set of software code may be used with all I2C peripherals.
GI2C is fast enough (even when generated in software) to be compatible with time-
triggered architectures. Typical data transfer rates will be up to 1,000 bytes / second(with a 1 ms scheduler tick).
We provide some background necessary for understanding and using the I
2C bus in
this section. Please note that much of the material here is adapted from the Philips(1998) I
2C specification. For further details, the reader is referred to this document, a
copy of which can be obtained from the Philips WWW site.1
Hardware
We begin by considering essential I2C hardware features.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 494
1.www.philips.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 520 ---
The bus
In the two-wire I2C bus the serial data (SDA) and serial clock (SCL) lines carry the
information between the various devices (Figure 23.1). Due to the variety of differenttechnologies (CMOS, NMOS, bipolar) used to create devices which can be connectedto the I
2C bus, the levels of the logical ‘0’ (LOW) and ‘1’ (HIGH) are not fixed and
depend on the system supply voltage. 
When the bus is free, both SCL and SDA lines are HIGH. Both SDA and SCL are bidirectional lines. The output stages of devices connected
to the bus should be open drain (open collector) in order to match the requirementsof this protocol. This will often mean using pins on Port 0 of an 8051 device (but seefollowing box).
The number of devices that can be connected to the I
2C bus is limited only by the
maximum bus load capacitance of 400 pF: in the absence of suitable information,assume that each peripheral device and its wiring contributes a total of 20 pF to thetotal capacitance.
Each of the lines is connected to the Vcc supply via a common pull-up resistor. If
we assume a capacitance of 20 pF per device, the required value of resistor is deter-mined by the maximum rise time in the I
2C specification (1,000 ns in Standard I2C).
This can be shown to translate into the following:
50R= d
where: Ris the required resistance (K Ω)
dis the number devices on the busI2C PERIPHERAL 495
FIGURE  23.1 Using the I2C busMicrocontroller
board
(I2C master)
Slave 1
SCL
SDA
Slave 2
Slave ...
Slave NRRVccNote that, in various applications, we have successfully used 8051 devices with
‘conventional’ (not open-drain) pins for I2C communications, without the use of
external pull-up resistors. 
If you do the same, we recommend that you do so only where a small number of
peripherals are used and that you test the resulting application thoroughly.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 521 ---
Device addresses
In I2C, the communication is address based: that is, each device on the bus has a
unique address and messages can be directed from anywhere on the bus to the devicewith a particular address. 
The device addresses are ten-bits long in the latest version of this standard (seven
bits in the original), allowing more than 1,000 different addresses to be used. Notethat devices with 7-bit and 10-bit addresses may be used on the same bus.
While the facility for 7-bit or 10-bit addresses are included in the I
2C specification,
in most practical cases, the address of a device is partially hard wired into the device. 
Consider, for example, a useful I2C peripheral, the Atmel 24C64 serial EEPROM.2
This device provides 8192 ×8 bits of non-volatile data storage, with data retention for
100 years. As such it is ideal, for example, for storing small amounts of data in moni-toring applications or for storing system passwords in other devices.
The pinout of the 24C64 is given in Figure 23.2. Note from the figure that there are
only three address lines, which will usually be pulled to Vcc or ground to set therequired device address. Assuming each device is given a unique address, up to eight24C64s may be connected to one I
2C bus, rather than 128 (27) or 1024 (210) as is sug-
gested by the I2C standard.
As far as the bus is concerned, the 24C64 has, in fact, a 7-bit address. However, the
most significant four bits are ‘hard wired’ into the device. These bits are always ‘1010’(0xA0), which is a code common to many serial EEPROMs. The full device address istherefore ‘1 0 1 0 A2 A1 A0’. 
The hard-wiring of part of the device address makes practical sense. Few applica-
tions require more than eight serial EEPROMs on a single bus, particularly since quitelarge capacity memory devices are now available with an identical interface. If the fulldevice address needed to be coded by the user for each device, the size of each chipwould have to be increased to allow for (at least) four more pins (Figure 23.3).
Very similar schemes are used in other I
2C devices. For example, the Dallas 1621
temperature sensor3is a useful and inexpensive component that provides a tempera-
ture reading, in Celsius, over an I2C bus (Figure 23.4).USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 496
FIGURE  23.2 Pin configuration for the Atmel 24C64 serial EEPROM4321
24C64
5678 A0
A1A2
GNDVCC
WP (Write protect)SCLSDA
2. A complete example of an I2C link from an 8051 to a 24C64 device is given on page 510.
3. A complete example of an I2C link from an 8051 to a DS1621 temperature sensor is given on
page 515.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 522 ---
Here, again, only three least significant bits of the address are user adjustable. In
this case, the full address of the device is ‘1 0 0 1 A2 A1 A0’. The hard-wired part ofthis address (0x90) is shared by many DAC devices. 
The I2C protocol: Masters and Slaves
Each device on an I2C bus can operate as either a transmitter or receiver of data. For
example, an LCD driver will generally act as a receiver, whereas a memory device canact as both a receiver and a transmitter. In addition to transmitters and receivers,devices can also be considered as Masters or Slaves. A Master is the device which initi-ates a data transfer on the bus and generates the clock signals to permit that transfer.At that time, any device addressed is considered to be a Slave. 
The I
2C bus has a multi-Master capability: this means that more than one device
capable of controlling the bus can be connected to it. This might be the useful, forexample, if I
2C were used to transfer data between two microcontrollers. 
Generation of clock signals on the I2C bus is always the responsibility of a Master
device; the Master generates its own clock signals when transferring data on the bus.In a single-Master system, bus clock signals from a Master can only be altered whenthey are stretched by a slow Slave device holding down the clock line.I2C PERIPHERAL 497
FIGURE  23.3 A 24C64 with device address ‘1010000’4321
24C64
5678Vcc
SCL
SCA
FIGURE  23.4 Pin configuration for the Dallas DS1621 (I2C) temperature sensor4321
24C64
5678 SDA
SCL
Tout
GNDVCC
A0A1A2
Please note that in this pattern we are concerned only with I2C applications involv-
ing a single microcontroller (the device Master) and one or more Slave peripherals.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 523 ---
Performing data transfers
We now consider how data are transferred between devices. Consider, for example,
that we wish to read a temperature value from a DS1621 temperature sensor discussedearlier: we would do so as follows:
1Generate a START condition
2Send DS1621 device address (with WRITE access request)
3Make sure that the Slave (DS1621) generates an ACKNOWLEDGE bit
4Send the command ‘Read Temperature’ (0xAA)
5Make sure that the Slave (DS1621) generates an ACKNOWLEDGE bit
6Generate another START condition
7Send DS1621 device address (with READ access request this time)
8Make sure that the Slave (DS1621) generates an ACKNOWLEDGE bit.
9Receive the first (most significant) byte of temperature data from the I2C bus
10 Perform a MASTER – ACKNOWLEDGE
11 Receive the second byte of temperature data from the I2C bus
12 Perform a MASTER – NOT ACKNOWLEDGE
13 Generate a STOP condition
Although this process appears at first glance rather complex, it contains all the core
I2C routines that are required for communication with any I2C peripheral. As a result,
when we have considered this process, you will be in a position to develop I2C inter-
faces for a very wide range of devices.
To understand the discussions that follow, it will be helpful to refer to Figure 23.5.We begin by considering the START and STOP conditions.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 498
FIGURE  23.5 The basic format of I2C communications
[Note: that one clock pulse is generated for each data bit transferred. Note also that the data on the SDA line must be stable durin g the
HIGH period of the clock. The HIGH or LOW state of the data line can only change when the clock signal on the SCL line is LOW.]SCL
SDA
Start StopXACK ACK
Time12 891 9www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 524 ---
START and STOP conditions
I2C communications begin with a START condition. Further START conditions may be
generated within the message, which will end with a STOP condition.
A START condition is represented as follows (see Figure 23.5): a HIGH to LOW
transition on the SDA line while SCL is HIGH.
A STOP condition is represented as follows (see Figure 23.5): a LOW to HIGH
transition on the SDA line while SCL is HIGH.
START and STOP conditions are always generated by the Master. 
Byte format
Every byte put on the SDA line must be eight bits long. The number of bytes that canbe transmitted per transfer is unrestricted. Each byte has to be followed by anACKNOWLEDGE bit (see following sections). 
Data are transferred with the most significant bit first. If a Slave cannot receive or
transmit another complete byte of data until it has performed some (internal) oper-ation, for example updating memory, it can hold the SCL line LOW to force theMaster into a wait state. Data transfer then continues when the Slave is ready foranother byte of data and releases SCL.
Slave ‘ACKNOWLEDGE’ and ‘NOT ACKNOWLEDGE’
In many situations the Master (the microcontroller in our case) will be sending datato the Slave (for example, an EEPROM). In these cases, the ‘Slave-receiver’ must gener-ate an ‘Slave-receiver ACKNOWLEDGE’ signal when it has received a byte of data. 
The ACKNOWLEDGE-related clock pulse is always generated by the Master. The
transmitter releases the SDA line (HIGH) during the ACKNOWLEDGE clock pulse.The Slave-receiver must pull down the SDA line during the ACKNOWLEDGE clockpulse so that it remains stable LOW during the HIGH period of this clock pulse. 
Usually, an active Slave-receiver is obliged to generate an ACKNOWLEDGE after
each byte has been received. 
When a Slave does not acknowledge the Slave address (for example, it is unable to
receive or transmit because it is performing some internal operation), the data linemust be left HIGH by the Slave. The Master can then generate either a STOP condi-tion to abort the transfer or a repeated START condition to start a new transfer.
If a Slave-receiver does acknowledge the Slave address but, some time later in the
transfer cannot receive any more data bytes, the Master must again abort the transfer.This is indicated by the Slave generating a ‘NOT ACKNOWLEDGE’ response on thefirst byte to follow: this means that the Slave leaves the data line HIGH during theACKNOWLEDGE clock pulse generated by the Master. The Master will then generatea STOP (or a repeated START) condition and – probably after a delay – will attemptthe transmission again.I2C PERIPHERAL 499www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 525 ---
Master-receiver ‘ACKNOWLEDGE’ and ‘NOT ACKNOWLEDGE’
In some situations the Master (the microcontroller in our case) will be receiving data
from the Slave (for example, the temperature sensor). In some cases, the ‘Master-receiver’ must generate a ‘Master-receiver ACKNOWLEDGE’ signal when it hasreceived a byte of data. However, at the end of the data transfer (when the Master-receiver has received the last byte of data it requires), it must signal the end of data tothe Slave-transmitter by not generating an ACKNOWLEDGE on the last byte that wasclocked out of the Slave. The Slave-transmitter must release the data line to allow theMaster to generate a STOP or repeated START condition.
Synchronization
All Masters generate their own clock on the SCL line to transfer messages on the I2C
bus. Data are only valid during the HIGH period of the clock. A defined clock is there-fore needed for the bit-by-bit arbitration procedure to take place.
Clock synchronization is performed using the wired AND connection of I
2C inter-
faces to the SCL line. This means that a HIGH to LOW transition on the SCL line willcause the devices concerned to start counting off their LOW period and, once a deviceclock has gone LOW, it will hold the SCL line in that state until the clock HIGH stateis reached. However, the LOW to HIGH transition of this clock may not change thestate of the SCL line if another clock is still within its LOW period. The SCL line willtherefore be held LOW by the device with the longest LOW period. Devices withshorter LOW periods enter a HIGH wait-state during this time.
When all devices concerned have counted off their LOW period, the clock line will
be released and go HIGH. There will then be no difference between the device clocksand the state of the SCL line and all the devices will start counting their HIGH peri-ods. The first device to complete its HIGH period will again pull the SCL line LOW. Inthis way, a synchronized SCL clock is generated with its LOW period determined bythe device with the longest clock LOW period and its HIGH period determined by theone with the shortest clock HIGH period.
Further details
A complete technical specification for the I2C bus will be found on the Philips
WWW site.
Solution
Should you use I2C?
In order to determine whether use of an I2C bus is appropriate in your time-triggered
application, we consider some key questions that should be asked when consideringthe use of any communications protocol or related technique.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 500www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 526 ---
Main application areas
The I2C bus was designed mainly to allow the interconnection of components within
a single application. Although the bus may be used, for example, to connect proces-sors (usually microcontrollers) to one another or to other computer systems, its mainapplication area is in the connection of standard peripheral devices, such as LCDpanels or EEPROMs, or ‘smart’ components in consumer applications (e.g. TV tuners,PLL synthesizers, video processors) to microcontrollers. 
Ease of development
I2C can be used to communicate with a large number and range of peripherals. By using
the same protocol to talk to a range of devices, development efforts may be reduced. 
Scalability
The maximum size of an I2C bus is limited by the maximum capacitance of 400 pF. To
estimate the maximum network size, we can add up the input capacitance of all thedevices we wish to connect to the bus. 
For example, the SGS-Thomson ST24C16 16K I
2C-compatible EEPROM has an
input capacitance of around 8 pF, and we could attach some 50 of these devicestogether on the same bus. Note that this rough calculation ignores any effects of straycapacitance due to the cabling itself. If we assume a ‘standard’ capacitance per deviceof 20 pF (including stray capacitance), we can still hope to connect around 20 periph-erals to the microcontroller over a single bus.
Overall, the bus supports large enough collections of peripherals to meet the needs
of its main application area. 
Flexibility
I2C is flexible. Networks of one Master and multiple Slaves and networks with
multiple Masters can both be implemented. Note: we consider only single-Masterapplications in this pattern.
Speed of execution and size of code
As we have mentioned, I2C can operate over a wide speed range: from 100 kbits/s in
the ‘standard’ version (1992), to 400 kbits/s in the ‘fast’ version, and now 3.4 Mbit/sin the latest ‘high-speed’ version introduced in 1998. 
However, in this pattern we are concerned with I
2C interfaces created entirely in
software. Such interfaces are only practical at the low end of the speed range.
Generation of the I2C protocol inevitably adds to the code size: see the core I2C
library (in the following example) for details.I2C PERIPHERAL 501www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 527 ---
Cost
The cost of licence fees for use of the bus is included in the cost of the peripheral
components which you purchase: in most circumstances, there are no additional feesto pay. 
Note that this may not be the case if, for example, you are implementing a I
2C
peripheral (to be sold for connection to an I2C bus). If in doubt, please contact Philips
for further details.
Choice of implementations and vendors
The I2C library presented here may be used with any 8051 device.
Suitability for use in time-triggered applications
As we saw in Chapter 18, the RS-232 communication protocol is appropriate for use intime-triggered applications. This suitability arises because the task duration associatedwith transmission (and reception) of data on an RS-232 network is very short. Notethat this transmission time is not directly linked to the baud rate of the network,largely because almost all of the 8051 family have on-chip hardware support for RS-232, with the result that messages are transmitted and received ‘in the background’.
The situation with I
2C is rather different. Specifically, in this pattern, we are con-
cerned with software-based I2C protocols; this undoubtedly adds to the software load.
For example, if we consider the process of sending one byte of data to an I2C-based
ROM chip (an example of this is presented in full later), then the total task duration isapproximately 0.5 ms. 
This task duration can be supported on a time-triggered application, even with 1
ms timer ticks, if the maximum data rate (1000 bytes / second) matches the needs ofthe application.
How do you use I2C in a time-triggered application?
The examples that follow include a complete I2C library which may be used with any
member of the 8051 family.
Hardware resource implications
I2C requires the use of two port pins. This is considerably fewer than would be
required to create a parallel interface to most peripheral devices.
There is, however, a significant CPU load: see ‘Solution’ for details.
Reliability and safety implications
The I2C protocol incorporates only minimal error-checking mechanisms: detection of
data corruption (for example) during the transfer of information to or from a periph-USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 502www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 528 ---
eral device must be carried out in software, if required. However, in most cases,
damage to cabling will be quickly detected.
Portability
I2C is a simple protocol and may be easily generated in software. This allows the tech-
niques presented here to be used with all8051 devices. 
Overall strengths and weaknesses
I2C is supported by a wide range of peripheral devices. 
I2C requires only two port pins to connect to (typically) up to 20 peripherals. 
I2C is a simple protocol and may be easily generated in software. This allows
all8051 devices to communicate with a wide range of peripheral devices.
A common set of software code may be used with all I2C peripherals.
Although I2C is fast enough (even when generated in software) to be compatible
with time-triggered architectures, typical data transfer rates will be comparativelyslow (up to 1000 bytes / second with a 1 ms scheduler tick).
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SPI PERIPHERAL [page 521]. 
Remember also that, if possible, the best approach is to avoid peripherals alto-
gether and use a microcontroller with on-chip facilities if possible. For example,rather than using a basic 8051 plus serial EEPROM, consider using the AtmelAT89LS8252, which has two kbytes of EEPROM on the chip.
Example: I2C core library
In this section we present a library of core I2C routines (Listings 23.1 to 23.3). In most
cases you will need to add some additional functions to use these files with particularI
2C peripherals: we illustrate this process in the examples that follow.
Please note that not all I2C devices use ACKNOWLEDGE / NOT ACKNOWLEDGE
signals (discussed earlier). Similarly, not all devices need a ‘read byte’ facility (PWMand DAC outputs, for example). You can omit these library features by means of theselines at the top of the I2C_Core.C file:
// Comment out these lines if these functions are *not* required
//#define I2C_ACK_NACK#define I2C_READ_BYTE
As usual, all of these files are included on the CD.I2C PERIPHERAL 503www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 529 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chapter 10) for the I
2C core library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ I2C_Core.C -----------------------------------------------
// The two-wire I2C bus
// NOTE: If using external pull-ups, // you will generally want to use Port 0sbit I2C_SCL = P1^7;sbit I2C_SDA = P1^6;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.1 Part of the I2C core library
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Core.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See I2C_Core.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
void  I2C_Send_Start(void);
void  I2C_Send_Stop(void);
tByte I2C_Write_Byte(const tByte); 
tByte I2C_Read_Byte(void);
void I2C_Send_Master_Ack(void);
void I2C_Send_Master_NAck(void);
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------
#define I2C_READ      0x01    // Read command
#define I2C_WRITE     0x00    // Write command
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.2 Part of the I2C core libraryUSING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 504www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 530 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_CORE.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Core of the I2C library.You will typically need other components 
(see, for example, I2C_ROM.C) to create a complete library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "I2C_Core.h"
#include "TimeoutH.H"
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static tByte I2C_Get_Ack_From_Slave(void); 
static bit   I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0(void);   static void  I2C_Delay(void);  
// Comment out this line if these functions are *not* required
//#define I2C_ACK_NACK
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Send_Start()Generates a 'start' condition.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Send_Start(void)
{// Prepare the busI2C_SCL = 1; I2C_SDA = 1; I2C_Delay();  
// Generate the START condition
I2C_SDA = 0; I2C_Delay(); I2C_SCL = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Send_Stop()Generates a 'stop'condition.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/I2C PERIPHERAL 505www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 531 ---
void I2C_Send_Stop(void)
{I2C_SDA = 0; I2C_Delay();   I2C_SCL = 1; I2C_Delay();   I2C_SDA = 1;   }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Get_Ack_From_Slave()We are implementing a 'Master-Slave' communication protocol
here, with the microcontroller as the Master.  This functionwaits (with timeout) for an acknowledgement from the Slave device.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte I2C_Get_Ack_From_Slave(void)
{// Prepare the busI2C_SDA = 1; I2C_SCL = 1;
if(I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0())
{return 1; // Error - failed to sync}
// Managed to synchronize the clock
I2C_Delay();       
if (I2C_SDA)       
{// Generate a clock cycleI2C_SCL = 0;  
return 1;  // Error - No ack from Slave 
}
I2C_SCL = 0; // Generate a clock cyclereturn 0;     // OK - Slave issued ack
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Write_Byte()Send a byte of data to the Slave.  
Supports slow Slaves by allowing 'clock stretching'.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 506www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 532 ---
Duration ~100 µs (except in the event of bus error).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte I2C_Write_Byte(tByte Data)
{tByte Bit = 0;  
// Sending data one bit at a time (MS bit first) 
for (Bit = 0; Bit < 8; Bit++ )
{I2C_SDA = (bit)((Data & 0x80) >> 7); I2C_SCL = 1;  
if (I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0())
{return 1; // Error - failed to sync}
I2C_Delay(); // Generate a clock cycle
I2C_SCL = 0;                        
// Prepare to send next bit
Data <<= 1;                    }
// Make sure the Slave acknowledges
return(I2C_Get_Ack_From_Slave());}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Read_Byte()Read a byte of data from the Slave.  
Supports slow Slaves by allowing 'clock stretching'.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte I2C_Read_Byte(void)
{tByte result  = 0;  // Return value with read I2C bytetByte Bit = 0;     // Bitcounter
for (Bit = 0; Bit < 8; Bit++ )
{I2C_SDA = 1;           // Release SDAI2C_SCL = 1;           // Release SCL
if (I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0())
{I2C PERIPHERAL 507www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 533 ---
return 1; // Error - failed to sync
}
I2C_Delay(); result <<= 1;      // Shift left the resultif (I2C_SDA)
{result |= 0x01;  // Set actual SDA state to LSB}
I2C_SCL = 0;       // Force a clock cycle
I2C_Delay();       }
return(result);
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0()Low-level function used during I2C data transfers.*** With 1ms hardware (Timer 0) timeout ***RETURNS:  1 - Error (not synchronized)
0 - OK (clock synchronized)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 1ms
TH0 = T_01ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_01ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
// Try to synchronize the clock
while ((I2C_SCL == 0) && (TF0 != 1)); 
TR0 = 0; // Stop the timer  if (TF0 == 1)
{return 1;  // Error - Timeout condition failedUSING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 508www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 534 ---
}
return 0;  // OK - Clock synchronized
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Delay()A short software delay (around 10 µs).  Adjust this for a minimum of 5.425 µs to work with
'standard' I2C devices.  Any delay longer than this will also work.With modern devices shorter delays may also be used.
NOTE: Cannot generally do this with a Hardware Delay.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Delay(void)
{int x;
x++;
x++;}
#ifdef I2C_ACK_NACK
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Send_Master_Ack()Generates an 'ACKNOWLEDGE' condition.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Send_Master_Ack(void)
{I2C_SDA = 0; I2C_SCL = 1;
I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0();I2C_Delay();  
I2C_SCL = 0;  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Send_Master_NAck()Generates a 'NOT ACKNOWLEDGE' condition.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Send_Master_NAck(void)
{I2C_SDA = 1; I2C_SCL = 1; I2C PERIPHERAL 509www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 535 ---
I2C_Sync_The_Clock_T0();
I2C_Delay();
I2C_SCL = 0;} 
#endif
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.3 Part of the I2C core library
Example: I2C EEPROM interface
In this example we consider how to link an 8051 microcontroller to a serial EEPROM
using an I2C bus. Note that use of such EEPROMs is a common way of retaining
system settings after power is removed: the storage is non-volatile, for a period ofaround 100 years.
Hardware
The required hardware is illustrated in Figure 23.6.  
Note that, in this case, we are not using an open-collector port and do not require
pull-up resistors. If you are using more than one I2C device, it is recommended that
you adapt the code to work with Port 0 (a trivial change) and use pull-up resistorvalues calculated as described in ‘Background’.
Software
The required software is contained in Listings 23.4 to 23.6. Note that you will alsorequire the core I
2C library from the ‘Solution’ section.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 510
FIGURE  23.6 A 24C64 with device address ‘1010000’4321
24C64
5678Vcc
SCL
SCAwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 536 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for I2C (24C64) library.Connect a 24C64 to the SDA and SCL pins described 
in the library file (I2C_Core.C).
Terminating resistors not generally required on the bus.Pull all three address lines (on the EEPROM) to ground.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "I2C_ROM.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
// In this test program, we define the error code variable here
// (usually in the scheduler library)tByte Error_code_G = 0;
void main( void )
{tByte data1 = 0;tByte data2 = 0;
tWord Data_address = 0;while (1) 
{Data_address = data1;
// Write to eeprom
I2C_Write_Byte_AT24C64(Data_address, data1);
// Read back from eeprom
data2 = I2C_Read_Byte_AT24C64(Data_address);
// Display value from eeprom
P1 = 255 - data2;
// Display error code
P2 = 255 - Error_code_G;
if (++data1 == 255)
{data1 = 0;}I2C PERIPHERAL 511www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 537 ---
Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);
}   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.4 Part of an I2C EEPROM library
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_ROM.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See I2C_ROM.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
// Read byte from EEPROM
tByte I2C_Read_Byte_AT24C64(tWord);
// Write byte to EEPROM
void I2C_Write_Byte_AT24C64(tWord,tByte);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.5 Part of an I2C EEPROM library
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_ROM.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
I2C library functions which are intended to allow
use of 2-wire serial EEPROMs (specifically, AT24C64).
Easily extended / adapted to work with other 2-wire EEPROMs.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "I2C_Core.h"#include "I2C_ROM.h"USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 512www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 538 ---
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
extern tByte Error_code_G;// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Device identifier of the EEPROM used in this example
// - see text / Philips documentation for IDs used by other devices#define I2C_EEPROM_ID 0xA0 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Write_Byte_AT24C64()Send a byte of data to the EEPROM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Write_Byte_AT24C64(const tWord address, tByte content)
{tByte MSByte;  // Most significant byte of data addresstByte LSByte;  // Least significant byte of data address
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition// Send SLAVE address with write request
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_EEPROM_ID | I2C_WRITE))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64;return;}
// MSByte of address
MSByte = (address >> 8) & 0x00FF;
// LSByte of Address
LSByte = address & 0x00FF;
// Send memory address
if (I2C_Write_Byte(MSByte))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64;return;}
// Send memory address
if (I2C_Write_Byte(LSByte))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64;return;}
// Send content to memory addressI2C PERIPHERAL 513www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 539 ---
if (I2C_Write_Byte(content))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_WRITE_BYTE_AT24C64;return;}
I2C_Send_Stop();    return;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Read_Byte_AT24C64()Read a byte of data from the EEPROM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte I2C_Read_Byte_AT24C64(tWord address)
{tByte MSByte;  // Most significant byte of data addresstByte LSByte;  // Least significant byte of data addresstByte Result = 0;
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition
// Send SLAVE address with dummy write request
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_EEPROM_ID|I2C_WRITE))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64;return 0;}
// MSByte of address
MSByte = (address >> 8) & 0x00FF;
// LSByte of address
LSByte = address & 0x00FF;
// Send memory address
if (I2C_Write_Byte(MSByte))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64;return 0;}
// Send memory address
if (I2C_Write_Byte(LSByte))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64;
return 0;}USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 514www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 540 ---
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition
// Send SLAVE address with read request
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_EEPROM_ID | I2C_READ))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_READ_BYTE_AT24C64;return 0;}
Result = I2C_Read_Byte();   // Read memory content// Don´t perform a MASTER ACK
I2C_Send_Stop();            
return(Result);
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.6 Part of an I2C EEPROM library
Example: I2C Temperature sensor interface
In this example we consider how to link an 8051 microcontroller to Dallas DS1621
(I2C) temperature sensor.
Hardware
See Figure 23.4.
Software
The key software files are in Listings 23.7 to 23.9: all the files required for the projectare included on the CD, in the directory associated with this chapter.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for I2C (DS1621) library.Connect a DS1621 to the SDA and SCL pins described 
in the library file (I2C_Core.C).Terminating resistors not generally required on the bus.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/I2C PERIPHERAL 515www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 541 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "I2C_1621.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
tByte Temperature_G;// In this test program, we define the error code variable here
// (usually in the scheduler library)tByte Error_code_G = 0;
void main( void )
{I2C_Init_Temperature_DS1621();
while(1) 
{I2C_Read_Temperature_DS1621();P1 = 255 - Temperature_G;P2 = 255 - Error_code_G;Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);}   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.7 Part of an I2C temperature sensor example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_1621.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See I2C_1621.H for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
void I2C_Read_Temperature_DS1621(void);
void I2C_Init_Temperature_DS1621(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.8 Part of an I2C temperature sensor exampleUSING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 516www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 542 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_1621.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
I2C-based library for DS1621 temperature sensor.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "I2C_core.h"
#include "I2C_1621.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern tByte Temperature_G;
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define I2C_DS1621_ID   0x90    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Init_Temperature_DS1621()Sets the sensor to 'continuous convert' mode to allow 
temperature readings to be subsequently obtained.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Init_Temperature_DS1621(void)
{I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition
// Send SLAVE address with write request
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_DS1621_ID | I2C_WRITE))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621; return;}
// Send control byte :
// configure commandif (I2C_Write_Byte(0xAC))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621; return;}
// Send configuration data - CONTINUOUS mode
if (I2C_Write_Byte(0x00)) I2C PERIPHERAL 517www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 543 ---
{
Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;return;}
I2C_Send_Stop();    // Generate STOP condition// Must delay here to allow EEPROM (in sensor)
// to store these data.  Sheet says 10ms.Hardware_Delay_T0(100);  
// Now start temperature conversions
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition
// Send SLAVE address with write request
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_DS1621_ID | I2C_WRITE))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;return;}
// Send command data - start converting
if (I2C_Write_Byte(0xEE)) 
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;return;}
I2C_Send_Stop();    // Generate STOP condition
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_Read_Temperature_DS1621()The sensor samples continuously (around 1 new value per second).
We obtain the latest value.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_Read_Temperature_DS1621(void)
{tByte result = 0;
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition// Send DS1621 device address (with write access request)
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_DS1621_ID | I2C_WRITE))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;return;}USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 518www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 544 ---
// Send command - Read Temperature (0xAA)
if (I2C_Write_Byte(0xAA))
{
Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;
return;}
I2C_Send_Start();   // Generate START condition (again)// Send DS1621 device address (with READ access request this time)
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_DS1621_ID | I2C_READ))
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_DS1621;return;}
// Receive first (MS) byte from I2C bus
Temperature_G = I2C_Read_Byte();I2C_Send_Master_Ack();     // Perform a MASTER ACK
// Here we require temperature only accurate to 1 degree C
// - we discard LS byte (perform a dummy read)I2C_Read_Byte();I2C_Send_Master_NAck();    // Perform a MASTER NACK
I2C_Send_Stop();    // Generate STOP condition
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 23.9 Part of an I2C temperature sensor example
Example: I2C ADC
See Chapter 32 for an example of an I2C interface to an analogue-to-digital converter.
Further reading
See the Philips I2C specification (see www.philips.com ) for further details. I2C PERIPHERAL 519www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 545 ---
Using ‘SPI’ peripherals
Introduction
When using asynchronous serial protocols, such as ‘RS-232’, the two devices that are
communicating must agree on a communication frequency (the baud rate) and eachdevice then uses (say) an independent crystal-based clock to ensure that it operates atthe required rate. One consequence of this approach is that, if the clocks in the trans-mitter and receiver devices vary by more than a few per cent, the receiving device willbe unable to decode the incoming data correctly.
By contrast, the serial peripheral interface (SPI) uses a synchronous communication
protocol: this means that both the transmitter and receiver devices share a commonclock. The transitions of this common clock determine when to send and receive thevarious bits. For example, in a simple synchronous protocol, the transmitter devicemay write a bit on the rising edge of the clock and the receiving device will then readthis bit when it detects the falling clock edge. Note that the clock frequency does notneed to be held constant.
Such synchronous interfaces are primarily intended for use over distances meas-
ured in centimetres rather than in metres and we will restrict our discussions here tothe use of SPI to link the 8051 with compatible peripherals.chapter 24www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 546 ---
SPI PERIPHERAL
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
GThe microcontroller in your application will be interfaced to one or more peripher-als, such as a keypad, EEPROM, digital-to-analogue converter or similar device.
GYour microcontroller has hardware support for the SPI protocol.
Problem
Should you use the SPI bus to link your microcontroller to peripheral devices and, ifso, how do you do so?
Background
There are five key features of SPI as far as the developer of embedded applicationsis concerned:
GSPI is a protocol designed to allow microcontrollers to be linked to a wide range ofdifferent peripherals – memory, displays, ADCs and similar devices – and requires(typically) three port pins for the bus, plus one chip-select pin per peripheral. 
GThere are many SPI-compatible peripherals available for purchase ‘off the shelf’.
GIncreasing numbers of ‘Standard’ and ‘Extended’ 8051 devices have hardware sup-port for SPI and we will make use of such facilities in this pattern. 
GA common set of software code may be used with all SPI peripherals.
GSPI is compatible with time-triggered architectures and, as implemented in this book,is faster than I
2C (largely due to the use of on-chip hardware support). Typical data
transfer rates will be up to 5,000–10,000 bytes / second (with a 1 ms scheduler tick).
We provide some background to SPI in this section.
History
Serial peripheral interface (SPI) was developed by Motorola and included on the
68HC11 and other microcontrollers. Recently, this interface standard has beenadopted by manufacturers of other microcontrollers. Increasing numbers of‘Standard’ and ‘Extended’ 8051 devices (see Chapter 3) have hardware support for SPIand we will make use of such facilities in this pattern. SPI PERIPHERAL 521www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 547 ---
Basic SPI operation
SPI is often referred to as a three-wire interface. In fact, almost all implementations
require two data lines, a clock line, a chip select line (usually one per peripheraldevice) and a common ground: this is at least four lines, plus ground. 
The data lines are referred to as MOSI (‘Master out Slave in’) and MISO (‘Master in
Slave out’). 
The overall operation of SPI is easy to understand if you remember that the proto-
col is based on the use of two 8-bit shift registers, one in the Master, one in the Slave(Figure 24.1).
The key operation in SPI involves transferring a byte of data between the Master
and the currently selected Slave device; simultaneously, a byte of data will be trans-ferred back from the Slave to the Master.
Single-Master, multi-Slave
SPI is a single-Master, multi-Slave interface. The Master generates the clock signal. Asfar as we are concerned here, the microcontroller will form the Master device and oneor more peripheral devices will act as Slaves. 
Choice of clock polarities
SPI supports two clock polarities. With polarity 0, the clock line is low in the quies-cent state: when active, the data to be sent are written on the rising clock edge andthe data are read on the falling clock edge. With polarity 1, the clock line is high inthe quiescent state: when active, the data to be sent are written on the falling clockedge and the data are read on the rising clock edge. 
Polarity 0 is more widely used.
Maximum clock rate
The maximum clock rate for SPI is currently 2.1 MHz. Allowing for the fact that ittakes eight clock cycles to transfer a byte of data and the fact that there are otherUSING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 522
FIGURE  24.1 The two 8-bit shift registers at the heart of the SPI protocol
[Note: that some Slave devices (such as EEPROMs) label the data lines SI (‘Slave in’) and SO (‘Slave out’). The SI line on the Slave  is con-
nected to the MOSI line on the Master and the SO line on the Slave is connected to the MISO line on the Master.]8-bit shift registerMSB LSB
8-bit shift registerMSB LSB
MISO MISO   (SO)
MOSI   (SI) MOSI
MASTER SLAVEwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 548 ---
overheads too (instructions and addresses, for example), the maximum data transfer
rates will be around 130,000 bytes per second.
Microwire
Note that the Microwire interface standard (developed by National Semiconductor) is
similar to SPI, although the connection names, polarities and other details vary:Microwire is not discussed further in this book.
Solution
Should you use SPI?
In order to determine whether use of an SPI bus is appropriate in your time-triggeredapplication, we consider some key questions that should be asked when consideringthe use of any communications protocol or related technique.
Main application areas
Although the SPI bus may be used, for example, to connect processors (usually micro-controllers) to one another or to other computer systems, its main application areais – like I
2C – in the connection of standard peripheral devices, such as LCD panels or
EEPROMs to microcontrollers. 
Ease of development
SPI can be used to communicate with a large number and range of peripherals. By using
the same protocol to talk to a range of devices, development efforts may be reduced. 
Scalability
Each SPI Slave device requires a separate /CS (chip select) line from the Master node.This increases the number of pins required on the microcontroller if large numbers ofperipherals are used.
Flexibility
Individual SPI-compatible microcontrollers may act as Master or Slave nodes. We con-sider only the use of the microcontroller as the Master node in this pattern.
Speed of execution and size of code
The maximum clock rate for SPI is currently 2.1 MHz. 
As we will be using hardware-based SPI in this pattern, the code overhead will
be small.SPI PERIPHERAL 523www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 549 ---
Cost
The cost of licence fees for use of the bus is included in the cost of the peripheral
components which you purchase: in most circumstances, there are no additional feesto pay. 
Note that this may not be the case if, for example, you are implementing an SPI
peripheral (to be sold for connection to an SPI bus). If in doubt, contact Motorola forfurther details.
Choice of implementations and vendors
The SPI library presented here may be used only with 8051 devices that have hard-ware support for SPI.
Suitability for use in time-triggered applications
As we saw in Chapter 18, the RS-232 communication protocol is appropriate for use intime-triggered applications. This suitability arises because the task duration associatedwith transmission (and reception) of data on an RS-232 network is very short. Note thatthis transmission time is not directly linked to the baud rate of the network, largelybecause almost all members of the 8051 family have on-chip hardware support for RS-232, with the result that messages are transmitted and received ‘in the background’.
The situation with SPI is similar. Specifically, in this pattern, we are concerned with
hardware-based SPI protocols. These typically impose a low software load and allow ashort task duration. For example, if we consider the process of sending one byte ofdata to an SPI-based ROM chip (an example of this is presented in full later), then thetotal task duration is approximately 0.1 ms; note that this is considerably shorterthan the equivalent operation using the I
2C library presented in this book.
This task duration can be easily supported in a time-triggered application, even
with 1 ms timer ticks.
How do you use SPI in a time-triggered application?
The discussions will centre around the Atmel AT89S53, a Standard 8051 device withon-chip SPI support. Note that hardware support provided by other manufacturers isvery similar.
The AT89S53 SPI features include the following:
GFull-duplex, three-wire synchronous data transfer
GMaster or Slave operation
G1.5 MHz bit frequency (max.)
GLSB first or MSB first data transfer
GFour programmable bit rates
GEnd of transmission interrupt flagUSING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 524www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 550 ---
GWrite collision flag protection
GWakeup from idle mode (Slave mode only)
The interconnection between Master and Slave CPUs with SPI is as shown in
Figure 24.1. 
The SCK pin is the clock output in the Master mode (the only mode we will use
here). Writing to the SPI data register of the Master CPU starts the SPI clock genera-tor and the data written shifts out of the MOSI pin and into the MOSI pin of theSlave CPU. After shifting one byte, the SPI clock generator stops, setting the end oftransmission flag (SPIF). If both the SPI interrupt enable bit (SPIE) and the serial portinterrupt enable bit (ES) are set, an interrupt is requested. We will not use theseinterrupt facilities.
The Slave Select input, SS/P1.4, is set low to select an individual SPI device as a
Slave. When SS/P1.4 is set high, the SPI port is deactivated and the MOSI/P1.5 pin canbe used as an input.
There are four combinations of SCK phase and polarity with respect to serial data,
which are determined by control bits CPHA and CPOL (see Table 24.1).
Most of the features of the SPI interface in the AT89S53 are illustrated in the
example that follows.
Hardware resource implications
With on-chip hardware support, SPI PERIPHERAL imposes a minimal software load.
Reliability and safety issues
The SPI protocol incorporates only minimal error-checking mechanisms: detection ofdata corruption (for example) during the transfer of information to or from a periph-eral device must be carried out in software, if required.
Portability
This pattern requires hardware support for SPI: it cannot be used with microcon-trollers without such support.
The discussions here are based on the Atmel 89S53. Use with other 8051 microcon-
trollers – including many Infineon 8051s – is straightforward.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SPI is supported by a wide range of peripheral devices.
SPI requires (typically) three port pins for the bus, plus one chip-select pin
per peripheral. 
Use of hardware-based SPI (as discussed here) facilitates the design of tasks
with short durations; as a consequence the protocol is well matched to theSPI PERIPHERAL 525www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 551 ---
needs of time-triggered applications. Typical data transfer rates will be up to
5,000–10,000 bytes / second (with a 1 ms scheduler tick).
A common set of software code may be used with all SPI peripherals.The use of this pattern is restricted to microcontrollers with hardware support for
SPI.USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 526
TABLE 24.1 The SPI control register (SPCR) in the Atmel 89S53
Bit Name Overview
7 SPIE SPI interrupt enable. Not used in this text
Usually set SPIE = 0
6 SPE SPE = 1 enables the SPI channel. Note that this means that the upper
nybble of Port 1 is not available for general-purpose I/O
Usually set SPE = 1
5 DORD The data order. DORD = 0 selects ‘most significant first’ data transmission;
DORD = 1 selects ‘least significant first’ data transmission
Usually set DORD = 0
4 MSTR Master / Slave select. MSTR = 1 selects Master SPI mode
We will only use Master mode in this text: set MSTR = 1
3 CPOL The clock polarity. When CPOL = 0, the SCK of the Master device is low 
when no data are being transmitted; when CPOL = 1, the SCK is highunder these circumstances
Usually set CPOL = 0
2 CPHA The clock phase. Refer to the Atmel documents for details
Usually set CPHA = 0
1 SPR1 The clock-rate select. These two bits control the SCK rate of the device, 
when it is configured as a Master
0 SPR0 The relationship between SCK and the oscillator / resonator frequency 
(‘Osc’) is as follows:
SPR1 SPR0 SCK
0 0 Osc / 4
0 1 Osc / 16
1 0 Osc / 64
1 1 Osc / 128
Note that the AT89S53 has a maximum (SPI) bit rate of 1.5 MHzwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 552 ---
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The use of this pattern is restricted to microcontrollers with hardware support for SPI:
see I2C PERIPHERAL [page 494] for an alternative solution that provides very similar
facilities without the need for hardware support.
Example: SPI core library
Our SPI implementation consists of an SPI ‘core’, to which additional libraries areadded to match the needs of particular EEPROMs etc.
The core is given in Listings 24.1 to 24.3.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the SPI Core Library
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ SPI_Core.C -----------------------------------------------// Create sbits for all required chip selects here
sbit SPI_CS = P1^4;  
// NOTE: pins P1.4, P1.5, P1.6 and P1.7 also used - see text/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 24.1 Part of the SPI core library for the Atmel AT89S53SPI PERIPHERAL 527www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 553 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_Core.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See SPI_Core.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
void  SPI_Init_AT89S53(const tByte);tByte SPI_Exchange_Bytes(const tByte);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 24.2 Part of the SPI core library for the Atmel AT89S53
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_Core.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Core SPI library for Atmel AT89S53.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SPI_Core.h"
#include "TimeoutH.H"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The error code variable
//// See Main.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_Init_AT89S53()Set up the on-chip SPI module.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 528www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 554 ---
void SPI_Init_AT89S53(const tByte SPI_MODE)
{// SPI Control Register (SPCR)// Bit 7 = SPIE (enable SPI interrupt, if ES is also 1)// Bit 6 = SPE  (enable SPI)// Bit 5 = DORD (data order, 1 for LSB first, 0 for MSB first)// Bit 4 = MSTR (1 for Master, 0 for Slave)
// Bit 3 = CPOL (clock polarity, 1 = high when idle, 0 = low when idle)
// Bit 2 = CPHA (transfer format)// Bit 1 = SPR1 (SPR0, SPR1 control the clock rate)// Bit 0 = SPR0 SPCR = SPI_MODE;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_Exchange_Bytes()Exchange a byte of data with the Slave device.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SPI_Exchange_Bytes(const tByte OUT)
{// Write byte to SPI register (starts clock)// - these data will be transferred to the Slave deviceSPDR = OUT;                  
// Wait until byte transmitted with 5ms timeout - START 
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer for timeout
TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts
// Simple timeout feature - approx 5ms
TH0 = T_05ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_05ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (((SPSR & SPIF_) == 0) && (!TF0)); TR0 = 0;  
if (TF0 == 1)
{// SPI device timed outError_code_G = ERROR_SPI_EXCHANGE_BYTES_TIMEOUT;
}SPI PERIPHERAL 529www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 555 ---
// Clear SPIF and WCOL
SPSR &= 0x3F; 
// Return contents of SPI register
// - these are the data from the Slave device               return SPDR;                 }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 24.3 Part of the SPI core library for the Atmel AT89S53
Example: Using an SPI EEPROM (X25320 or similar)
In this example we present an SPI library allowing communication with an external
EEPROM. In this case we have used a X25320 (4k ×8-bit) device, but any similar SPI
EEPROM can be used without difficulty. Such devices are very useful as a means ofstoring non-volatile information such as passwords and similar information.
The hardware is based on the Atmel 89S53 (see Figure 24.2). Note that in main() we do the following:
SPI_Init_AT89S53(0x51);
In this case, with a 12 MHz crystal on the board, this sets the SPI clock rate to
750,000 bits/second: this is roughly 100 bytes / millisecond, meaning that the dura-tion of the basic data transfer tasks is approximately 0.01 ms.
The key files are given in Listings 24.4 to 24.6. You will also need the core SPI files
presented earlier. As usual, all the files for this project are included on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for SPI code library.Writes and reads Xicor X25320 (4k x 8-bit) EEPROM
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "SPI_Core.h"#include "SPI_X25.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
// In this test program, we define the error code variable here.
tByte Error_code_G = 0;USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 530www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 556 ---
void main(void)
{tByte Data1 = 0;tByte Data2 = 0;
tWord Data_address = 0;// See text for details 
SPI_Init_AT89S53(0x51);
while (1) 
{// Write to EEPROMSPI_X25_Write_Byte(Data_address, Data1++);SPI PERIPHERAL 531
FIGURE  24.2 Connecting an SPI EEPROM to the Atmel AT89S5330 pF30 pFRST
XTL1
XTL2
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7 (SCK)
P1.6 (MISO)P1.5 (MOSI)
P1.4(/SS)
P1.3P1.2
P1.1 (T2EX)
P1.0(T2)
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8052
VSS32
33343536373839
8
7654321
28
272625242322219
19
18
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
VccSCLKDOUTDIN
/C812 MHz10 µF
6
25
1Vcc (+5V)
10 K
Vcc
X25320 (PDIP)Vcc
/WP
/Hold
VSS
48
37www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 557 ---
// Read back from EEPROM
Data2 = SPI_X25_Read_Byte(Data_address);
// Display value from EEPROM
P2 = 255 - Data2;
// Display error codes (if any)
P3 = 255 - Error_code_G;
if (++Data_address == 4095)
{Data_address = 0;}
Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);
}   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 24.4 Part of an example linking an SPI EEPROM to the Atmel AT89S53
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_x25.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See SPI_x25.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------void SPI_X25_Write_Byte(const tWord, const tByte);
tByte SPI_X25_Read_Byte(const tWord);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 24.5 Part of an example linking an SPI EEPROM to the Atmel AT89S53USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 532www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 558 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_X25.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple SPI library for Atmel AT89S53- allows data storage on Xicor X25138 EEPROM (or similar)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SPI_Core.h"
#include "SPI_X25.h"#include "TimeoutH.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The error code variable
//// See Main.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------void SPI_Delay_T0(void);
void SPI_X25_Read_Status_Register(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_X25_Write_Byte()Store a byte of data on the EEPROM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SPI_X25_Write_Byte(const tWord ADDRESS, const tByte DATA)
{// 0. We check the status registerSPI_X25_Read_Status_Register();  
// 1. Pin /CS is pulled low to select the device
SPI_CS = 0;
// 2. The 'Write Enable' instruction is sent (0x06)
SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x06);
// 3. The /CS must now be pulled high
SPI_CS = 1;
// 4. Wait (briefly)
SPI_Delay_T0();SPI PERIPHERAL 533www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 559 ---
// 5. Pin /CS is pulled low to select the device
SPI_CS = 0;
// 6. The 'Write' instruction is sent (0x02)
SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x02);
// 7. The address we wish to read from is sent.  
//    NOTE: we send a 16-bit address: 
//    - depending on the size of the device, some bits may be ignored.
SPI_Exchange_Bytes((ADDRESS >> 8) & 0x00FF);  // Send MSBSPI_Exchange_Bytes(ADDRESS & 0x00FF);       // Send LSB
// 8. The data to be written is shifted out on MOSI
SPI_Exchange_Bytes(DATA);
// 9. Pull the /CS pin high to complete the operation
SPI_CS = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_X25_Read_Byte()Read a byte of data from the EEPROM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SPI_X25_Read_Byte(const tWord ADDRESS)
{tByte Data;
// 0. We check the status register
SPI_X25_Read_Status_Register();  
// 1. Pin /CS is pulled low to select the device
SPI_CS = 0;
// 2. The 'Read' instruction is sent (0x03)
SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x03);
// 3. The address we wish to read from is sent.  
// NOTE: we send a 16-bit address: // depending on the size of the device, some bits may be ignored.SPI_Exchange_Bytes((ADDRESS >> 8) & 0x00FF);SPI_Exchange_Bytes(ADDRESS & 0x00FF);
// 4. The data requested is shifted out on SO by sending a dummy byte
Data = SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x00);
// 5. We pull the /CS pin high to complete the operation
SPI_CS = 1;USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 534www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 560 ---
return Data; // Return SPI data byte
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_X25_Read_Status_Register()We read the status register only to make sure that previous
'Write' operations (if any) are now complete.To do this, we check the WIP ('Write In Progress') flag.
*** NB: THE INTERNAL EEPROM WRITE OPERATION TAKES UP 10ms ***
*** Schedule writes (and reads after writes) at sensible ****** intervals - or you will get task jitter ***
We timeout after ~15ms.Uses T0 for (hardware) timeout - see Chapter 15.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SPI_X25_Read_Status_Register()
{tByte Data;bit Wip;
// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer 
TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts// Simple timeout feature - approx 15ms
TH0 = T_15ms_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_15ms_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
do {
// 0. Pin /CS is pulled low to select the deviceSPI_CS = 0;
// 1. The 'RDSR' instruction is sent (0x05)
SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x05);
// 2. The contents of the ROM status register are read
Data = SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x00);
// 3. Pull the /CS pin high to complete the operation
SPI_CS = 1;
// Check the WIP flag
Wip = (Data & 0x01);
} while ((Wip != 0) && (TF0 != 1));SPI PERIPHERAL 535www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 561 ---
TR0 = 0;  
if (TF0 == 1)
{// ROM timed outError_code_G = ERROR_SPI_X25_TIMEOUT;}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_Delay_T0()A delay of approx 50 µs using 'timeout' code.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SPI_Delay_T0(void)
{// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts
// Simple timeout feature - approx 50 µs
TH0 = T_50micros_H; // See TimeoutH.H for T_ detailsTL0 = T_50micros_L;TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timer
while (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/ 
Listing 24.6 Part of an example linking an SPI EEPROM to the Atmel AT89S53
Example: Using an SPI ADC
See Chapter 32, where an SPI-based analogue-to-digital converter is used.
Further reading
—USING SERIAL PERIPHERALS 536www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 562 ---
Time-triggered 
architectures for multiprocessor systems
In Part F, we turn our attention to multiprocessor applications. As we will see, an important
advantage of the time-triggered (co-operative) scheduling architecture is that it is inher-ently scaleable and that its use extends naturally to multiprocessor environments.
In Chapter 25, we consider some of the advantages – and disadvantages – that can result
from the use of multiple processors. We then go on to introduce the shared-clock sched-uler and illustrate how this operating environment may be used to create efficienttime-triggered applications involving two or more microcontrollers.
In Chapter 26, we consider shared-clock schedulers that are kept synchronized through
the use of external interrupts on the Slave microcontrollers. These simple schedulersimpose little memory, CPU or hardware overhead. However, they are generally suitableonly for use for system prototyping or where the Master and Slave microcontrollers are onthe same circuit board.
In Chapter 27, we describe in detail techniques for creating shared-clock schedulers that can
link multiple controllers over large distances, using the ubiquitous RS-232 and RS-485 proto-cols and suitable transceiver hardware. In addition, we demonstrate that the same techniquesmay be applied at short distances without the need for any transceiver components.
Finally, in Chapter 28, we consider shared-clock schedulers that communicate via the
powerful ‘controller area network’ (CAN) bus. The CAN bus is now very widely used inautomotive, industrial and other sectors: it forms an excellent platform for reliable, multi-processor applications, particularly where there is a need to move comparatively largeamounts of data around the network. Like UART-based techniques, the CAN protocol issuitable for use in both local and distributed systems.part fwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 563 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 564 ---
An introduction to shared-clock
schedulers
In this chapter, we consider one additional important characteristic of embedded applica-
tions: the use of multiple processors. As we will see, the scheduler architecture introduced inprevious chapters may be extended without difficulty in order to support such applications.
25.1 Introduction
Despite the diverse nature of the embedded applications we have discussed in previ-
ous chapters, each of these has involved only a single microcontroller. By contrast,many modern embedded systems contain more than one processor. For example, amodern passenger car might contain some 40 such devices (Leen et al., 1999), con-
trolling brakes, door windows and mirrors, steering, air bags and so forth. Similarly,an industrial fire detection system might typically have 200 or more processors, asso-ciated, for example, with a range of different sensors and actuators.
We begin this chapter by considering two key advantages of multiprocessor sys-
tems and then go on to introduce a form of co-operative scheduler – the shared-clockscheduler – that can help the developer get the most from such a design.
We conclude by discussing some of the reliability implications of multiprocessor
implementations.
25.2 Additional CPU performance and hardware facilities
Suppose we require a microcontroller with the following specification:
G60+ port pins
GSix timerschapter 25www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 565 ---
GTwo USARTS
G128 kbytes of ROM
G512 bytes of RAM
GA cost of around $1.00 (US)
We can meet many of these requirements with an EXTENDED 8051 [page 46]:
however, this will typically cost at the very least around 5–10 times the $1.00 price werequire. By contrast, the ‘microcontroller’ in Figure 25.1 matches these requirementsvery closely.
Figure 25.1 shows two standard 8051 microcontrollers linked together by means of
a single port pin: as we demonstrate in 
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)[page 554], this type of
scheduler can be created with a minimal software and hardware load. The result is aflexible environment with 62 free port pins, five free timers, two USARTs and so on.Note that further microcontrollers may be added without difficulty and the commu-nication over a single wire (plus ground) will ensure that the tasks on all processorsare perfectly synchronized.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 540
FIGURE  25.1 Linking two 8051 microcontrollers using a simple shared-clock schedulerP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 566 ---
Of course, in addition to the features listed, the two-microcontroller design also
has two CPUs. In many (but not all) cases, this can allow you to perform tasks morequickly or to carry out more tasks within a given time interval. 
The patterns 
LONG TASK [page 716] and DOMINO TASK [page 720], sometimes used
in conjunction with DATA UNION [Page 712], encapsulate effective software architec-
tures that allow you to get the best performance out of such a multiprocessor design.
25.3 The benefits of modular design
Suppose we are required to produce a range of different clocks, with various forms ofdisplay (Figure 25.2).
Some of the clocks may have different features (for example, the ability to set an
alarm), but the key tasks are the same in all cases: to keep accurate track of the timeand display this information on a display.
In some circumstances, it may be useful to distribute the application over two
modules, each with a separate microcontroller. The first module would deal with thebasic timekeeping and time adjustment facilities; the second module would providesupport for the different displays, such as an LCD driver or a stepper motor. Thisapproach may provide economic benefits, since it allows us to produce many thou-sands of the basic timekeeping modules at low cost. We can then produce differentdisplays, as required, to match the needs of particular customers. 
This type of modular approach is very common in the automotive industry where
increasing numbers of microcontroller-based modules are used in new vehicle designs. 
Consider another example. Suppose we have a data-acquisition system with a
single processor and a number of distributed (simple) sensors (Figure 25.3).
In this arrangement, if the cable to (say) Sensor 1 is damaged, then no data will be
obtained from this sensor until the link is repaired; worse, if an inappropriate datarepresentation has been used, the acquisition system may not even be aware that thelink has been damaged.
Consider now an alternative solution using ‘intelligent’ sensors (Figure 25.4).In this version of the system, Sensor 1 is (we assume) in very close proximity to a
microcontroller (‘MCU A’); together, these two components make up our ‘intelligent’sensor. Communication between the intelligent sensor and the main acquisitionINTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 541
FIGURE  25.2 Various displays for a range of clock productsT A H MCurrent Time : 01:44
Alarm Time : --:--www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 567 ---
system will be arranged in such a way that a broken connection is easily detected. In
these circumstances, we could arrange for the sensor node to continue to collect datawhile the link is repaired, with the result that, following a repair, the ‘missing’ datacould be recovered by the main acquisition board.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 542
FIGURE  25.3 An outline design for a simple data acquisition systemAcquisition
system
1Sensor
2PCSensor
1
Sensor
3
FIGURE  25.4 An outline design for an ‘intelligent’ data-acquisition systemAcquisition
system
1Sensor
2PCSensor
1
Sensor
3MCU
A
2
MCU
C
4MCU
B
3www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 568 ---
This type of ‘intelligent’ node behaviour can be very useful in many circumstances.
For example, in the A310 Airbus, the slat and flap control computers form an ‘intelli-gent’ actuator subsystem. If an error is detected during landing, the wings are set to asafe state and then the actuator subsystem shuts itself down (Burns and Wellings,1997, p. 102).
As we will see in the remaining chapters in Part F, most S-C schedulers support the
creation of backup nodes, which may be made ‘intelligent’ if this is required.
25.4 How do we link more than one processor?
We will now begin to consider some of the challenges that face developers who wishto design multiprocessor applications. We begin with a fundamental problem:
GHow do we keep the clocks on the various nodes synchronized?
We then go on to address two further problems that can arise with many such systems:
GHow do we transfer data between the various nodes?
GHow does one node check for errors on the other nodes?
As we will see, by using a shared-clock (S-C) scheduler, we can address all three prob-
lems. Moreover, the time division multiple access (TDMA) protocol we employ to achievethis is a ‘natural extension’ (Burns and Wellings, 1997, p. 484), to the time-triggered archi-tectures for single-processor systems which we have described in earlier parts of this book.
Synchronizing the clocks
Why do we need to synchronize the tasks running on different parts of a multiproces-sor system?
Consider a simple example. Suppose we are developing a portable traffic-light
system designed to control the flow of traffic on a narrow road while repairs are car-ried out. The system is to be used at both ends of the area of road works and willallow traffic to move in only one direction at a time (Figure 25.5).
The conventional ‘red’, ‘amber’ and ‘green’ bulbs will be used on each node, with
the usual sequencing (Figure 25.6). INTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 543
FIGURE  25.5 A portable traffic-light control systemPortable traffic
light controllerwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 569 ---
We will assume that there will be a microcontroller at each end of the traffic-light
application to control the two sets of lights. We will also assume that each microcon-troller is running a scheduler and that each is driven by an independent crystaloscillator circuit. 
The problem with this arrangement is that the schedulers on the two microcon-
trollers are likely to get quickly ‘out of sync’. This will happen primarily because thetwo boards will never run at exactly the same temperature and, therefore, the crystaloscillators will operate at different rates. 
This can cause real practical difficulties. In this case, for example, we run the risk
that both sets of traffic lights will show ‘green’ at the same time, a fact likely to result,quickly, in an accident.
The S-C scheduler tackles this problem by sharing a single clock between the vari-
ous processor boards, as illustrated schematically in Figure 25.7.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 544
FIGURE  25.6 The required light sequence for the traffic-light exampleR
A
GR
A
GR
A
GR
A
GR
A
G
Time
FIGURE  25.7 The simplest form of S-C scheduler 
[Note: this involves the sending of tick messages from the Master to the Slave(s) at regular intervals. All S-C schedulers provide t his
facility.]Master Slave 1 Slave 2 Slave N
Tick messages (from Master to Slaves)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 570 ---
Here we have one, accurate, clock on the Master node in the network. This clock
is used to drive the scheduler in the Master node in exactly the manner discussed inPart C .
1
The Slave nodes also have schedulers: however, the interrupts used to drive these
schedulers are derived from ‘tick messages’ generated by the Master (Figure 25.8).Thus, in a CAN-based network (for example), the Slave node will have a S-C schedulerdriven by the ‘receive’ interrupts generated through the receipt of a byte of data sentby the Master.
In the case of the traffic lights, changes in temperature will, at worst, cause the
lights to cycle more quickly or more slowly: the two sets of lights will not, however,get out of sync.
Transferring data
So far we have focused on synchronizing the schedulers in individual nodes. In manyapplications, we will also need to transfer data between the tasks running on differentprocessor nodes.
To illustrate this, consider again the traffic-light controller. Suppose that a bulb
blows in one of the light units. When a bulb is missing, the traffic control signals areambiguous: we therefore need to detect bulb failures on each node and, havingdetected a failure, notify the other node that a failure has occurred. This will allow us,for example, to extinguish all the (available) bulbs on both nodes or to flash all thebulbs on both nodes: in either case, this will inform the road user that something isamiss and that the road must be negotiated with caution.INTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 545
FIGURE  25.8 Communication between the Master and Slave nodes in the simplest (CAN-based)
S-C network 
[Note: This involves the transmission of these tick messages, triggered by the timer ticks in the Master. The receipt of the regular  mes-
sages by the Slave is the source of the interrupt used to drive the scheduler in this node: the Slave does nothave a separate timer-based
interrupt. By default, there is a slight delay between the tick generation on the Master and Slave nodes in some networks (nota bly CAN-
and UART-based networks). This delay is short (a fraction of a millisecond in most cases); equally important, it is predictable  and fixed.
We discuss how to calculate and, where necessary, eliminate this delay in Chapters 27 and 28.]Tick
messageTick
messageTick
messageSlave tick(from CAN hardware)
Master tick (from timer)Time
1. Where necessary, a temperature-compensated or satellite-based clock may be used in the Master
node to ensure accurate timing throughout the network: see Chapter 4.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 571 ---
If the light failure is detected on the Master node, then this is straightforward. As
we discussed earlier, the Master sends regular tick messages to the Slave, typicallyonce per millisecond. These tick messages can – in most S-C schedulers – include datatransfers: it is therefore straightforward to send an appropriate tick message to theSlave to alert it to the bulb failure.
To support the transfer of data from the Slave to the Master, we need an additional
mechanism: this is provided through the use of ‘acknowledgement’ messages (Figure25.9). The end result is a simple and predictable 
‘time division multiple access’ (TDMA)
protocol (e.g. see Burns and Wellings, 1997), in which acknowledgement messagesare interleaved with the tick messages. For example, Figure 25.10 shows the mix oftick and acknowledgement messages that will be transferred in a typical two-Slave(CAN) network.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 546
FIGURE  25.9 Most S-C schedulers support both ‘tick’ messages (sent from the Master to the Slaves)
and ‘acknowledgement’ messages (sent by the Slaves to the Master)Master Slave 1 Slave 2 Slave N
Tick messages (from Master to Slaves)Acknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
message
FIGURE  25.10 Communication between the Master and Slave nodes in a S-C (CAN) scheduler with one
Master and two Slave nodes
[Note: Here the tick messages update the scheduler in all Slave nodes. However, each tick message will require an acknowledgement
message from only one node: this acknowledgement will be sent in the period before the next tick message. This, again, meets th e
requirements of this simple and predictable (TDMA) network protocol.]Tick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)Tick
message
(Data for S2)Ack
message
(from S2)Tick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)Slave tick(from CAN hardware)
Master tick (from timer)Timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 572 ---
Detecting network and node errors
Consider the traffic light control system one final time. We have already discussed the
synchronization of the two nodes and the mechanisms that can be used to transferdata. What we have not yet discussed is problems caused by the failure of the networkhardware (cabling, tranceivers, connectors and so on) or the failure of one of the net-work nodes.
For example, a simple problem that might arise is that the cable connecting the
two sets of lights becomes damaged or is severed completely. This is likely to meanthat the ‘tick messages’ from the Master are not received by the Slave, causing theslave to ‘freeze’. If the Master is unaware that the Slave is not receiving messages thenagain we run the risk that the two sets of lights will both, simultaneously, showgreen, with the potential risk of a serious accident (see Figure 25.11).
The S-C scheduler deals with this potential problem using the error detection and
recovery mechanisms which we discuss in the next section.
Detecting errors in the Slave(s)
The use of a shared-clock scheduler makes it straightforward for the Slave to detecterrors very rapidly. Specifically, because we know from the design specification thatthe Slave should receive ticks at (say) 1 ms intervals, we simply need to measure thetime interval between ticks; if a period greater than 1 ms elapses between ticks, weconclude that an error has occurred. INTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 547
Note that, in a shared-clock scheduler, alldata transfers are carried out using the
interleaved tick and acknowledgement messages: no additional messages are
permitted on the bus . As a result, we are able to pre-determine the network band-
width required to ensure that all messages are delivered precisely on time.
FIGURE  25.11 A portable traffic-light system in a dangerous state, as a result of a cable failurewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 573 ---
In many circumstances an effective way of achieving this is to set a watchdog timer2 in
the Slave to overflow at a period slightly longer than the tick interval. Under normal cir-cumstances, the ‘update’ function in the Slave will be invoked by the arrival of each tickand this update function will, in turn, refresh the watchdog timer. If a tick is not received,the timer will overflow and we can invoke an appropriate error-handling routine. 
We discuss the required error-handling functions further next.
Detecting errors in the Master
Detecting errors in the Master node requires that each Slave sends appropriateacknowledgement messages to the Master at regular intervals (see Figure 25.10). Asimple way of achieving this may be illustrated by considering the operation of aparticular one-Master, ten-Slave network:
GThe Master node sends tick messages to all nodes, simultaneously, every millisec-ond; these messages are used to invoke the update function in all Slaves everymillisecond.
GEach tick message will, in most schedulers, be accompanied by data for a particularnode. In this case, we will assume that the Master sends tick messages to each ofthe Slaves in turn; thus, each Slave receives data in every tenth tick message (every10 milliseconds in this case).
GEach Slave sends an acknowledgement message to the Master only when it receivesa tick message with its ID; it does notsend an acknowledgement to any other
tick messages.
As mentioned previously, this arrangement provides the predictable bus loading
that we require and a means of communicating with each Slave individually. It alsomeans that the Master is able to detect whether or not a particular Slave hasresponded to its tick message.
Handling errors detected by the Slave
We will assume that errors in the Slave are detected with a watchdog timer. To deal withsuch errors, the shared-clock schedulers presented in this book all operate as follows:
GWhenever the Slave node is reset (either having been powered up or reset as aresult of a watchdog overflow), the node enters a ‘safe state’.
GThe node remains in this state until it receives an appropriate series of ‘start’ com-mands from the Master.
This form of error handling is easily produced and is effective in most circumstances. 
One important alternative form of behaviour involves converting a Slave into a
Master node in the event that failure of the Master is detected. This behaviour can beMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 548
2. See HARDWARE WATCHDOG [page 217]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 574 ---
very effective, particularly on networks (such as CAN networks) which allow the
transmission of messages with a range of priority levels. We will not consider this pos-sibility in detail in the present edition of this book.
Handling errors detected by the Master
Handling errors detected by the Slave node(s) is straightforward in a shared-clock net-work. Handling errors detected by the Master is more complicated. We consider andillustrate three main options in this book:
GThe ‘Enter safe state then shut down’ option
GThe ‘Restart the network’ option
GThe ‘Engage backup Slave’ option
We consider each of these options now.
Enter a safe state and shut down the network
Shutting down the network following the detection of errors by the Master node is
easily achieved. We simply stop the transmission of tick messages by the Master. Bystopping the tick messages, we cause the Slave(s) to be reset too; the Slaves will thenwait (in a safe state). The whole network will therefore stop, until the Master is reset. 
This behaviour is the most appropriate behaviour in many systems in the event of
a network error, if a ‘safe state’ can be identified . This will, of course, be highly
application dependent. 
For example, we have already mentioned the A310 Airbus’ slat and flap control
computers which, on detecting an error during landing, restore the wing system to asafe state and then shut down. In this situation, a ‘safe state’ involves having bothwings with the same settings; only asymmetric settings are hazardous during landing(Burns and Wellings, 1997, p.102).
The strengths and weaknesses of this approach are as follows:
It is very easy to implement.
It is effective in many systems.It can often be a ‘last line of defence’ if more advanced recovery schemes
have failed.
It does not attempt to recover normal network operation or to engage backup
nodes. 
This approach may be used with any of the networks we discuss in this book
(interrupt based, UART based or CAN based). We illustrate the approach in detail inChapter 26.INTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 549www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 575 ---
Reset the network
Another simple way of dealing with errors is to reset the Master and, hence, the
whole network. When it is reset, the Master will attempt to re-establish communica-tion with each Slave in turn; if it fails to establish contact with a particular Slave, itwill attempt to connect to the backup device for that Slave.
This approach is easy to implement and can be effective. For example, many
designs use ‘N-version’ programming to create backup versions of key components.
3
By performing a reset, we keep all the nodes in the network synchronized and weengage a backup Slave (if one is available).
The strengths and weaknesses of this approach are as follows:
It allows full use to be made of backup nodes.
It may take time (possibly half a second or more) to restart the network; even if
the network becomes fully operational, the delay involved may be too long (forexample, in automotive braking or aerospace flight-control applications).
With poor design or implementation, errors can cause the network to be continu-
ally reset. This may be rather less safe than the simple ‘enter safe state and shutdown’ option.
This approach may be used with any of the UART- or CAN-based networks we
discuss in this book. We illustrate the approach in detail in Chapter 27.
Engage a backup Slave
The third and final recovery technique we discuss in the present edition of this bookis as follows. If a Slave fails, then – rather than restarting the whole network – we startthe corresponding backup unit. 
The strengths and weaknesses of this approach are as follows:
It allows full use to be made of backup nodes.
In most circumstances it takes comparatively little time to engage the backup unit.
The underlying coding is more complicated than the other alternatives discussed
in this book.
This approach may be used with any of the UART- or CAN-based networks we
discuss in this book. We illustrate the approach in detail in Chapter 28.
25.5 Why additional processors may not always improve
reliability
It is very important to appreciate that – without due care – increasing the numbers of
processors in a network can have a detrimental impact on overall system reliability.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 550
3. See Leveson, 1995, for detailed discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of N-version program-
ming techniques.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 576 ---
It is not difficult to see why this is the case. For example, we will ignore the
possibility of failures in the links between processors and the need for a more complex(software) operating environment. Instead, we will assume that a network has100 microcontrollers and that each of these devices is 99.99% reliable. As a result, amultiprocessor application which relies on the correct, simultaneous operation of all100 nodes will have an overall reliability of 99.99% ×99.99% ×99.99% … This is
0.9999
100, or approximately 37%. This is a huge decrease in reliability : a 99.99% reli-
able device might be assumed to fail once in 10,000 years, while the corresponding37% reliable device would then be expected to fail approximately every 18 months.
4
For example, consider the use of ‘redundant nodes’ as discussed earlier. Specifically,
suppose we are developing an automotive cruise-control system (Figure 25.12).
The cruise-control application has clear safety implications: if the application sud-
denly fails and sets the car at full throttle, fatalities may result. As a result, we maywish to use two microcontroller-based nodes in order to provide a backup unit in theevent that the first node fails (Figure 25.13).
This can be an effective design solution: for example, if we have a network with
two essentially identical nodes and we are able to activate the second node when thefirst one fails then it seems likely that this will improve the overall system reliability.In effect, this is the approach used to good effect in many aircraft flight-control appli-cations where the ‘main’, ‘backup’ and ‘limp home’ controllers may be switched in, asrequired, by the pilot or co-pilot (e.g. Storey, 1996). 
However, the mere presence of redundant networks does not itself guarantee
increased reliability. For example, in 1974, in a Turkish Airlines DC-10 aircraft, the cargodoor opened at high altitude. This event caused the cargo hold to depressurize, which inINTRODUCTION TO SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULERS 551
It is only where the increase in reliability resulting from the shared-clock design
outweighs the reduction in reliability known to arise from the increased system
complexity that an overall increase in system reliability will be obtained.Unfortunately, making predictions about the costs and benefits (in reliability terms)of any complex design feature remains – in most non-trivial systems – something ofa black art.
FIGURE  25.12 An outline design for an automotive cruise-control systemSimple
cruise
controlSpeed
sensorCurrent speedThrottle
settingThrottle
4. See Storey, 1996, for a rather more rigorous analysiswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 577 ---
turn caused the cabin floor to collapse. The aircraft contained two (redun dant) control
lines, in addition to the main control system – but all three lines were under the cabinfloor. Control of the aircraft was therefore lost and it crashed outside Paris, killing 346people (Bignell and Fortune, 1984, pp. 143–4; Leveson, 1995, pp. 50 and 434).
In addition, in many embedded applications, there is either no human operator in
attendance or the time available to switch over to a backup node (or network) is toosmall to make human intervention possible. In these circumstances, if the compo-nent required to detect the failure of the main node and switch in the backup node iscomplicated (as often proves to be the case), then this ‘switch’ component may itselfbe the source of severe reliability problems (see Leveson, 1995).
25.6 Conclusions
In this chapter we have considered some of the advantages and disadvantages thatcan result from the use of multiple processors. We also introduced the shared-clockscheduler and sought to demonstrate that this operating environment may be used tocreate efficient time-triggered applications involving two or more microcontrollers.
We will provide detailed descriptions of a range of shared-clock schedulers in the
chapters that follow.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 552
FIGURE  25.13 An outline design for an automotive cruise-control system with backup control unitMain cruise-
control
unitSpeed
sensorCurrent speedThrottle
settingThrottle
1
Backup checks
Backup
CC
unit
2Current speedThrottle
setting
Note that these comments should not be taken to mean that multiprocessor
designs are inappropriate for use in high-reliability applications. Multiple processorscan be (and are) safely used in such circumstances. However, all multiprocessordevelopments must be approached with caution and must be subject to particularlyrigorous design, review and testing.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 578 ---
Shared-clock schedulers using
external interrupts
Introduction
In this chapter we present two simple implementations of the shared-clock scheduler
architecture. In each case the Master and Slave devices are kept in synchronyby means of pulses (generated by the Master) that invoke interrupts on the Slavemicrocontrollers: these interrupts, in turn, drive the ‘update’ functions in theSlave schedulers.
These simple schedulers are very powerful and impose little memory, CPU or hard-
ware overhead. chapter 26
Note that the use of external interrupts to convey tick messages means that the
resulting applications are at particular risk from sources of electromagnetic interfer-ence (EMI). As a result, these schedulers are only suitable for ‘local’ networks: thatis, for applications containing multiple microcontrollers which are displaced by nomore than (at most) a few centimetres; in most cases, the microcontrollers will becontained in the same, shielded system box and mounted on the same PCB. www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 579 ---
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one 8051 micro-
controller.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on a local network of two (or more) 8051 microcontrollersconnected together via an interrupt link?
Background
To summarize the material in Chapter 25, the key characteristics of S-C schedulers areas follows:
GScheduling is co-operative.
GThe network includes one Master and N Slaves, where N >= 1.
GThe Master is attached to an accurate oscillator. Overflow of an internal timer(driven by this oscillator) runs the Master scheduler and in turn causes ‘tick mes-sages’ to be sent to the Slaves.
GThe Slaves run their schedulers based on interrupts generated through the arrivalof the tick messages from the Master. That is, the Slaves do not use internal timersto drive the schedulers.
GEach Slave runs a (low-accuracy) watchdog timer to detect failure of the Masterdevice.
In addition, most S-C schedulers have the following characteristics:
GThe Master expects to have received an acknowledgement from every Slave after N
messages have been sent. That is, each Slave acknowledges 1 out of N messages. 
GThe maximum delay before the Slaves detect the loss of the Master can be aslittle as two tick periods (this will depend on the setting of the Slaves’ internalwatchdog timers). 
GThe maximum delay before the Master detects the loss of all Slaves (for example,following a complete network failure) will generally be one tick period. 
GThe maximum delay before the Master detects the loss of a particular Slave (forexample, following failure of a single node) will generally be N tick periods. MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 554www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 580 ---
Solution
We discuss two possible implementations of a simple shared-clock scheduler in
this section.
Basic technique
As we discussed in Chapter 25, the first problem we face when scheduling tasks acrossmore than one microcontroller is ensuring that the tasks on the various boards remainsynchronized. A shared-clock (S-C) scheduler tackles this problem by sharing a singleclock between the various processor board, as illustrated schematically in Figure 26.1.
Here we have one, accurate, clock on the Master node in the network. This clock is
used to drive the scheduler in the Master node in the normal way: that is, by inter-rupts generated through the overflow of one of the on-chip timers. Thus, the ‘update’function in the Master units typically looks something like this:
void SCI_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 
{...}
The Slave nodes also have schedulers: however, the interrupts used to drive these
schedulers are derived not from timers but, instead, from the ‘tick messages’ gener-ated by the Master. There are various ways in which messages from the Master may beused to generate interrupts, as we will see throughout Part F. In the case of all of theschedulers in the present chapter, the source of the interrupts is a change in the volt-age level at one of the ‘external interrupt’ input pins, such as Pin 3.2 (Interrupt 0):SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 555
FIGURE  26.1 The simplest form of S-C scheduler 
[Note : This involves the sending of tick messages from the Master to the Slave(s) at regular intervals. All S-C schedulers provide
this facility.]Master Slave 1 Slave 2 Slave N
Tick messages (from Master to Slaves)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 581 ---
void SCI_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_EXTERNAL_0 
{...}
Generating this voltage level change at the required time is straightforward:
GIn the ‘update’ function in the Master, we change a port pin (say Pin 2.0) from
Logic 1 to Logic 0.
GIn the Slave, we configure the ‘update’ function in the scheduler so that it isinvoked by an external interrupt on, say, Pin 3.2.
GWe connect the Master and Slave microcontrollers together, as illustrated inFigure 26.2.
The two microcontrollers will now operate precisely in step.
Note that there is no reason why this approach cannot be used with more than
one Slave (Figure 26.3).MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 556
FIGURE  26.2 A very simple shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler. P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 582 ---
Adding flesh on the bones
We now consider the implementation of this scheduler in more detail: Figure 26.4
illustrates a practical hardware framework.
As we discussed in Chapter 25, we can improve the reliability of the shared-clock
network by adding a watchdog timer to the Slave unit(s). When this is added then –with appropriate coding – the Slaves are able to detect a failure in the Master orelsewhere in the network. 
Of course, it is not necessary to use an external watchdog timer: Figure 26.5 shows
an alternative hardware platform employing an internal watchdog timer.
A complete code implementation for this scheduler is given in the examples
that follow.
Increasing the system reliability
The shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler just described is simple and powerful. In thisenvironment, failure of the Master is quickly detected by the Slave(s). However, if oneof the Slave fails, this will not be detected by either the Master or the other Slaves. 
This scheduler is therefore not adequate for applications where we need to be sure
that all nodes are running correctly. Figure 26.6 shows one way of addressing thisproblem: note that this solution is only appropriate for two-node networks.
In Figure 26.6, we again have two 8051-based nodes. The Slave can detect the fail-
ure of the Master (or the communication link) through use of the watchdog. Thistime, however, the signal used by the Slave to refresh the external Slave watchdog isalso fed to the Master node: by monitoring activity on the watchdog pin, the Mastercan determine whether the Slave is still operational.
A complete code example for this form of scheduler is given later in this chapter.SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 557
FIGURE  26.3 Simple shared-clock (interrupt) schedulers may involve multiple Slaves8051-
family
micro8051-
family
microMasterPX.Y8051-
family
micro
P3.2(Int 0)P3.2(Int 0)
8051-
family
microP3.2(Int 0)Slave ...Slave 1
Slave Nwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 583 ---
Hardware resource implications
This is a very efficient scheduler. The additional software load in the Master node –
compared with a standard co-operative scheduler – is generally too small to measure.The hardware required is only two port pins on each of the Master and Slave devices. 
In addition, in the Slave(s), Timer 0, Timer 1 and, where applicable, Timer 2 are
all available.
Reliability and safety implications
The use of SCI S CHEDULER (TICK)has a number of important safety and reliability
implications. Please review the material in this section carefully before deciding to usethis architecture in your application.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 558
FIGURE  26.4 A possible hardware platform for an SCI scheduler (with external watchdog timer on Slave
unit)P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
module
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
modulewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 584 ---
Why additional processors may not always improve reliability
See page 550 for a discussion of the reasons why use of multiple microcontrollers may
decrease the system reliability.
The impact of oscillator drift
The accuracy of the timing in the whole network of, say, ten microcontrollersdepends on the stability of the clock in the Master. Where necessary, a temperature-compensated or satellite-based clock may be used in the Master node to ensureaccurate timing throughout the network.
The techniques required to achieve this are discussed in 
STABLE SCHEDULER
[page 932].SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 559
FIGURE  26.5 A possible hardware platform for an SCI scheduler (with internal watchdog timer on Slave
unit)P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave  (with internal watchdog)
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset
modulewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 585 ---
The impact of oscillator failure
One legitimate criticism that can be made of the shared-clock scheduler is that the
Master node itself is a ‘single point of failure’. That is, if the oscillator attached tothe Master node fails completely or if the Master software or hardware fails, the wholenetwork will stop.
This is a legitimate concern, but it may be addressed through the creation of one or
more ‘backup Master’ units, that operate as follows:
GUnder normal circumstances, incoming ticks from the Master put the backupMaster to sleep.
GIf the ticks stop (indicating failure of the Master), then the backup Master discon-nects the Master from the bus and takes over this role.
GMultiple backup Masters may be used on the same network, by varying the timetaken to respond to a Master failure. Thus, one Backup Master may step in afterone second, the second after two seconds and so on.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 560
FIGURE  26.6 Another form of shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler. 
[Note: In this version, the Master is able to determine whether the Slave is operational.]P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
module
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
module
Ack
Tickwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 586 ---
The dangers of external interrupts
The use of external interrupts to convey tick messages means that the resulting appli-
cations are at particular risk from sources of electromagnetic interference (EMI),unless sensible precautions are taken.
This sensitivity of the microcontroller to EMI is greatly increased if long leads
(that is, aerials) are connected to the interrupt pins. As a result, these schedulers areonly suitable for ‘local’ networks: that is, for applications containing multiple micro-controllers which are displaced by no more than (at most) a few centimetres; in mostcases, the microcontrollers should be mounted on the same PCB and housed in ashielded box. 
Detecting and handling errors
We discussed three techniques for detecting and handling errors in a shared-clocknetwork in Chapter 25. In this chapter we assume that ‘enter safe state then shutdown’ error handling is used: see Chapter 25 for further details.
Portability
Almost all microcontroller families have at least one external interrupt pin. As aresult, these patterns may be adapted without difficulty for use with these families.
Overall strength and weakness
Simple, effective and with very low overheads.
Provides one-way communication between Master and Slave(s): Master cannot
detect errors on the Slave node(s).
There is no mechanism for transferring data between the Master and Slave (or
vice versa).
The system may be vulnerable to EMI unless sensible precautions are taken.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The other patterns in this chapter and throughout Part F provide alternative tech-
niques for linking together more than one microcontroller.
In addition, there is a further alternative, illustrated in Figure 26.7. In Figure 26.7,
the only link between the Master and the Slave is the reset and clock circuits; eachdevice has its own timer-driven scheduler. This approach is not generally recom-mended, for the following reasons:
GWe have to use an important hardware resource (a timer) on each of the nodes.
GThe tasks on the two (or more) nodes will not, generally, be synchronized, sincethe start of scheduling on each node will depend on the time taken to perform ini-tialization functions (if any) on each node.SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 561www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 587 ---
GThe Master and Slaves are completely independent: no node has any knowledge of
the status of the other nodes. 
Example: Precise timer ticks and standard baud rates
As illustrated in Figure 26.6, an SCI scheduler will typically use a single oscillatorcircuit to drive the two (or more) processors: this reduces the cost and the physicalboard size. 
However, this need not be the best option. If, for example, we use a 12 (or 24) MHz
oscillator to drive the Master, all the microcontrollers can be operated with precise1 ms tick timing. If one of the Slaves has a separate 11.059 MHz oscillator circuit, theSlave will operate at 1 ms ticks, but will also be capable of generating standard (e.g.9,600) baud rates (Figure 26.8). 
This combination can be very useful in some applications.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 562
FIGURE  26.7 An alternative ‘shared-clock’ scheduler, where the Master and Slave units are very loosely
coupled.P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset
modulewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 588 ---
Example: Traffic lights (Version 1)
We will illustrate the use of the schedulers in this chapter using different versions of
the ‘traffic-light’ example introduced in Chapter 25. 
Figure 26.9 shows the hardware to be used in the first example of this system. The
three LEDs on pins 2.0, 2.1 and 2.2 represent the lights (red, amber and green, respec-tively). The additional LED on Pin 0.7 is a ‘flashing LED’ used simply to illustrate theoperation of the prototype.
The software for the Master and Slave nodes, based on SCI S
CHEDULER (TICK), is
in Listings 26.1 to 26.7.
Software – Master node
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------‘Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project SCI_Ti1M (Chap 26)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 563
FIGURE  26.8 A shared-clock scheduler with Master and Slave employing different oscillator frequenciesP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
1112131415161718
1920
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
1112131415161718
1920
2040
Oscillator
(11.05 MHz)Reset/WD
moduleWD Refresh
RS-232
Oscillator
(12 MHz)Reset
modulewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 589 ---
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ SCI_Ti1m.C -------------------------------------------------
// This pin is wired to the interrupt input pin
// (usually Pin 3.2 or P 3.3) of the Slave microcontrollerMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 564
FIGURE  26.9 Hardware for a simple ‘traffic light’ example
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa). This example is, therefore, intended purely to illustrate the use of this si mple shared-
clock scheduler architecture.]VccVccVccP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]
P 1.2
P 1.3P 1.4
P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)
P 3.2 (/INT0)
P 3.3 (/INT1)
P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)
P 0.2 (AD2)
P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)
P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)
P 2.4 (A12)
P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)
P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635
34
3332
31
30
29
28
2726
25
24
23
22211
2345
6
78
9
10
1112
13
141516
17
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]
P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4
P 1.5P 1.6
P 1.7
RST
P 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)
P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)
P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)
P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)
P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)
P 2.5 (A13)
P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)
P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
383736
35
343332
31
30
29
28
2726
25
24
23
2221123
45
678
9
10
1112
13
1415
16
17
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
(1232)
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
(1812)
VccVccVccError
port
RRR
RedAmberGreenVcc
R
TickFlashError
port
RedAmberGreenVcc
RFlashwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 590 ---
sbit Interrupt_output_pin = P2^5;
// ------ TLights_A.C ----------------------------------------------sbit Red_light   = (P2^0);
sbit Amber_light = (P2^1);sbit Green_light = (P2^2);
// ------ LED_Flas.C -----------------------------------------------
// For flashing LED
sbit LED_pin = P2^7;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.1 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node) 
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tran sfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler for 89C52, etc.*** Tick 1 - MASTER CODE ****** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (1 ms) ***Required linker options (see text for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (LED_Flash_Update,TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (LED_Flash_Update,TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "LED_flas.h"
#include "SCI_Ti1m.H"#include "TLight_A.h"
/* ................................................................. */
/* ................................................................. */
void main(void)
{SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 565www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 591 ---
// Set up the scheduler 
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Init_T2();
// Prepare for the traffic light task
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init();
// Prepare for the flash LED task (demo only)
LED_Flash_Init();
// Add a 'flash LED' task (on for 1000 ms, off for 1000 ms)
SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
// Add a 'traffic light' task
SCH_Add_Task(TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update, 30, 1000);
// Start the scheduler
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.2: Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node) 
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Ti1m.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK INTERRUPT SCHEDULER FOR 8051/52 *** MASTER NODE : TICK-ONLY (DUPLEX) ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
--- Assumes '1232' watchdog on Slave ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 566www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 592 ---
#include "SCI_Ti1m.H"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "TLight_A.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.You must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// Now set up Timer 2// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 567www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 593 ---
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2    = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2    = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Start(void) 
{// Try to place system in 'safe' state at start or after errorsSCI_TICK1_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Delay here to cause the Slave to time out and reset
// Adjust this delay to match the timeout periods on the Slaves// Hardware_Delay_T0(500);
// Now send first tick to start the Slave
// (starts on falling edge)Interrupt_output_pin = 1;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);Interrupt_output_pin = 0;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Update_T2MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 568www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 594 ---
This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interruptINTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Must manually clear this. // Send 'tick' message to the Slave
Interrupt_output_pin = 0;
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
// Prepare for next tick
Interrupt_output_pin = 1;}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 569www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 595 ---
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Slave node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Ack messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void) reentrant
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as required
// Here we display a safe output
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.3: Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node) 
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TLight_A.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Traffic light control program Simplex version 
- has no information about bulb status on other node.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "TLight_A.h"
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Easy to change logic here
#define ON  0#define OFF 1MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 570www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 596 ---
// Times in each of the (four) possible light states
// (Times are in seconds - must call the update task once per second)//#define RED_DURATION  (10)#define RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION  (10)
// NOTE: 
// GREEN_DURATION must equal RED_DURATION// AMBER_DURATION must equal RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION#define GREEN_DURATION RED_DURATION #define AMBER_DURATION RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION
// Must specify whether this is a MASTER or a SLAVE unit
#define MASTER_SLAVE MASTER
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// The state of the system
static eLight_State Light_state_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------bit TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Check_Local_Bulb(void);/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init()Prepare for scheduling.
-*-----------------------------------------------------------------*/
void TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init(void)
{// Master and Slave must start in opposite statesif (MASTER_SLAVE == MASTER)
{Light_state_G = RED;}
else
{Light_state_G = GREEN;}
// Display safe output until scheduler starts
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update()SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 571www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 597 ---
Must be scheduled once per second.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update(void)
{static tWord Time_in_state;
// Check for blown bulbs on this node
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Check_Local_Bulb();
// This is the main update code
switch (Light_state_G)
{case RED: 
{Red_light = ON;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == RED_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = RED_AMBER;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case RED_AMBER: 
{Red_light = ON;Amber_light = ON;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == RED_AND_AMBER_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = GREEN;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case GREEN: 
{Red_light = OFF;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = ON;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 572www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 598 ---
if (++Time_in_state == GREEN_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = AMBER;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case AMBER: 
{Red_light = OFF;Amber_light = ON;Green_light = OFF;
if (++Time_in_state == AMBER_DURATION)
{Light_state_G = RED;Time_in_state = 0;}
break;
}
case BULB_BLOWN: 
{// Blown bulb detected// Switch all bulbs off// (Drivers won't be happy, but it will be clear//  that something is wrong)Red_light = OFF;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = OFF;
// We remain in this state until state
// is changed manually, or system is resetbreak;}
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Check_Local_Bulb()Check the status of the local bulbs (DUMMY FUNCTION HERE)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 573www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 599 ---
bit TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Check_Local_Bulb(void)
{// This dummy function confirms the bulbs are OK//// - See Chapter 32 for complete version of this function.return RETURN_NORMAL;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output()Used in the event of system failure, etc.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output(void)
{if (TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Check_Local_Bulb() == RETURN_NORMAL)
{// Bulbs are OK // - best thing to do is to display STOPRed_light = ON;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = OFF;}
else
{// At least one bulb has blown // - best thing we can do is extinguish all bulbsRed_light = OFF;Amber_light = OFF;Green_light = OFF;} 
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.4 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node). 
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tran sfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 574www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 600 ---
Software – Slave node
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project SCI_Ti1s (see Chap 26)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ SCI_Ti1s.C -------------------------------------------------// P3^3 used for interrupt input// Connect 1232 (pin /ST) to the WATCHDOG_pin
sbit WATCHDOG_pin = P3^2;
// ------ TLights_A.C ----------------------------------------------
sbit Red_light   = (P2^0);
sbit Amber_light = (P2^1);sbit Green_light = (P2^2);
// ------ LED_Flas.C -----------------------------------------------
// For flashing LED
sbit LED_pin = P2^7;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.5 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Slave node)
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 575www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 601 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for shared-clock interrupt scheduler.*** TICK 2 - SLAVE CODE ***--- HARDWARE ASSUMED ---
--- 89C52 (or any 8051/52 device with T2)--- DS1232 (or similar) external watchdog [see text for conns]
*** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (1 ms) ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
Required linker options (see text for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (LED_Flash_Update,TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (LED_Flash_Update,TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "LED_Flas.h"
#include "SCI_Ti1s.H"#include "TLight_A.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the scheduler SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Init();
// Set up the flash LED task (demo purposes)
LED_Flash_Init();
// Prepare for the traffic light task
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Init();
// Add a 'flash LED' task (on for 1000 ms, off for 1000 ms)
SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
// Add a 'traffic lights' task
SCH_Add_Task(TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Update, 10, 1000);
// Start the scheduler
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Start();
while(1)MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 576www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 602 ---
{
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.6 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Slave node)
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Ti1s.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULER [INTERRUPT BASED] FOR 8051/52 *** TICK1 - SLAVE NODE ****** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ****** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (1 ms) ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCI_Ti1s.h"
#include "TLight_A.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);static void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 577www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 603 ---
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Init()
Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.
Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Init(void) 
{tByte i;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ---------- External interrupt 0 ----------
// The Slave is driven by an interrupt input// The interrupt is enabled // It is triggered by a falling edge at pin P3.2IT0 = 1;EX0 = 1;
// Start the watchdog
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Start()Starts the Slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{// Place system in a safe state// - Slave will keep returning here if Master does not startMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 578www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 604 ---
// - or otherwise fails.
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();
// Now in a safe state
// Wait here - indefinitely - for the first tick// (Refresh the watchdog to avoid constant watchdog restarts)while (IE0 == 0)
{SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// Clear the flag
IE0 = 0;
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Init().
This Slave is triggered by external interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_EXTERNAL_0  
{tByte Index;
// Feed the watchdog
// Master will monitor this pin to check for Slave activity SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Now do 'standard' scheduler updates// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Incr. the run flagSCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 579www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 605 ---
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.
If the Master fails (or other error develops), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the Slave. This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state. The Slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The Slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances. The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)  
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required wwith different watchdog hardware//// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()
Feed the external (1232) watchdog.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 580www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 606 ---
Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)
HARDWARE: Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{static bit WATCHDOG_state;
// Change the state of the watchdog pin
if (WATCHDOG_state == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;}
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK1_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.7 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Slave node)
[Note: that, in this simple version of the application, the Master cannot detect failures in the Slave node. In addition, no data tr ansfer is
possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 581www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 607 ---
Example: Traffic lights (Version 2)
The main drawback with the system implemented in the previous example was that
failure of the Slave node would not be detected by the Master. This example solvesthis problem, by including both ‘tick’ and ‘acknowledgement’ messages in the com-munication protocol. The required hardware is illustrated in Figure 26.10.
Software – Master node
We present a key software listing (Listing 26.8) for the Master node in this version ofthe scheduler here: the remainder of the files for this project will be found on the CD.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 582
FIGURE  26.10 Hardware for a simple ‘traffic light’ example (Version 2)
[Note: that, in this version of the application, no data transfer is possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]VccVccVccP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]
P 1.2P 1.3
P 1.4
P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RST
P 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)
P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)
P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)
P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)
P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)
P 0.4 (AD4)
P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)
P 2.3 (A11)
P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)
P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38
373635
34
3332
31
30
29
28
27
2625
24
23
22
211
2
345
6
78
9
10
11
121314
15
16
17
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]
P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4
P 1.5
P 1.6
P 1.7
RST
P 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)
P 3.2 (/INT0)
P 3.3 (/INT1)
P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)
P 3.6 (/WR)
P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)
P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)
P 0.5 (AD5)
P 0.6 (AD6)
P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)
P 2.3 (A11)
P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)
P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38
373635
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
262524
23
22
2112
345
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
(1232)
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
(1812)
VccVccVccError
port
RRR
RedAmberGreenVcc
R
TickFlashError
port
RedAmberGreenVcc
RFlashAckwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 608 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Ti2m.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK INTERRUPT SCHEDULER FOR 8051/52 *** MASTER NODE : TICK-ONLY (DUPLEX) ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
--- Assumes '1232' watchdog on Slave ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCI_Ti2m.H"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "TLight_A.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Used to detect Slave activity
bit First_call_G;bit Watchdog_input_previous_G;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// Used to reset system in event of Slave error (see Main.C)
extern bit System_reset_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(void);
static bit  SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Process_Ack(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.You must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 583www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 609 ---
void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// Now set up Timer 2// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2    = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2    = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabled
TR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 584www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 610 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Start(void) 
{// Try to place system in 'safe' state at start or after errorsSCI_TICK2_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Delay here to cause the Slave to time out and reset
// Adjust this delay to match the timeout periods on the SlavesHardware_Delay_T0(500);
// Now send first tick to start the Slave
// (starts on falling edge)Interrupt_output_pin = 1;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);Interrupt_output_pin = 0;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Update_T2This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interruptINTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Must manually clear this. // Get the ack message from the Slave
if (SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Process_Ack() == RETURN_ERROR)
{// Did not receive ack!Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;
// Enter safe state and remain here until reset
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();while(1); }
// Send 'tick' message to the Slave
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(); SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 585www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 611 ---
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
// Prepare for next tick
Interrupt_output_pin = 1;}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message()This function sends a tick message.The receipt of this message will cause an interrupt to be generated
in the Slave(s): this will, in turn, invoke the scheduler 'update' function in the Slave(s).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(void) 
{// Send tick (falling edge) to the SlaveInterrupt_output_pin = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 586www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 612 ---
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Process_Ack()
Checks that the Slave is operating.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Process_Ack(void) 
{if (First_call_G)
{// This is the first time this function has been calledFirst_call_G = 0;
// Prepare for subsequent checking of the watchdog pin
Watchdog_input_previous_G = Slave_watchdog_pin;}
else
{// Watchdog pin should change state every time// - if the Slave is running correctlyif (Watchdog_input_previous_G == Slave_watchdog_pin)
{// Error!return RETURN_ERROR;}
// Slave is OK
Watchdog_input_previous_G = Slave_watchdog_pin;}
// Set up port for reading
SCI_transfer_port = 0xFF;
return RETURN_NORMAL;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Slave node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Ack messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 587www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 613 ---
void SCI_TICK2_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void) reentrant
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as required
// Here we display a safe output
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.8 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node)
[Note: that no data transfer is possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
Software – Slave node
We present a key software listing (Listing 26.9) for the Slave node in this version of
the scheduler here: the remainder of the files for this project will be found on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Ti2s.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULER [INTERRUPT BASED] FOR 8051/52 *** TICK2 - SLAVE NODE ****** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ****** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (1 ms) ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCI_Ti2s.h"
#include "TLight_A.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 588www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 614 ---
static void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);
static void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Init()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.
Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Init(void) 
{tByte i;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ---------- External interrupt 0 ----------
// The Slave is driven by an interrupt input// The interrupt is enabled // It is triggered by a falling edge at pin P3.2IT0 = 1;EX0 = 1;
// Start the watchdog
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Start()Starts the Slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 589www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 615 ---
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{// Place system in a safe state// - Slave will keep returning here if Master does not start// - or otherwise fails.SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();
// Now in a safe state
// Wait here - indefinitely - for the first tick// (Refresh the watchdog to avoid constant watchdog restarts)while (IE0 == 0)
{SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// Clear the flag
IE0 = 0;
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Init().
This Slave is triggered by external interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_EXTERNAL_0  
{tByte Index;
// Feed the watchdog
// Master will monitor this pin to check for Slave activity SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Now do 'standard' scheduler updates// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{
// The task is due to runMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 590www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 616 ---
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Incr. the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.
If the Master fails (or other error develops), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the Slave.  This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state.  The Slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The Slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances. The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required wwith different watchdog hardware//// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()
Feed the external (1232) watchdog.
Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)SCI SCHEDULER (TICK) 591www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 617 ---
HARDWARE: Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{static bit WATCHDOG_state;
// Change the state of the watchdog pin
if (WATCHDOG_state == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;}
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_TICK2_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.9 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Slave node)
[Note: that no data transfer is possible between Master and Slave (or vice versa).]
Further reading
—MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 592www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 618 ---
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one 8051 micro-
controller.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on (and transfer data over) a local network of two 8051microcontrollers connected together via an interrupt link?
Background
Refer to Chapter 25 for an introduction to shared-clock schedulers.
Solution
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK )[page 554] is a simple, flexible and reliable scheduler.
However, use of such a scheduler means that the system must be partitioned so thatthe tasks running on the Master and Slave nodes do not need to communicate, sincethis simple scheduler does not support data transfer between nodes.
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )builds on SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)and provides a facility for
transferring data between nodes. The basic hardware framework used to provide thisbehaviour is illustrated in Figure 26.11.
Like 
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK), this scheduler keeps the tasks on the two controllers
synchronized and allows both the Master and Slave nodes to detect when the othernode, or the communication channel, has failed. 
However, in addition, this scheduler allows one byte of information to be trans-
ferred between the Master and the Slave with each ‘tick’ message; similarly, one byteof data is transferred between the Slave and the Master with each ‘ack’ message.
A complete code listing is given later, to illustrate how the data are transferred.
Hardware resource implications
Like SCI SCHEDULER (TICK ), this is an efficient scheduler. The additional software
load in the Master node – compared with a standard co-operative scheduler – is toosmall to measure. 
However, this scheduler requires use of two ports (one on the Master, one on the
Slave) to support the data transfers, in addition to the two port pins (on each micro-controller) used for the ‘tick’ and ‘ack’ signals.SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 593www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 619 ---
Reliability and safety implications
Many of the reliability and safety considerations raised in connection with SCI
SCHEDULER (TICK)[page 554] also apply here.
Portability
Almost all microcontroller families have at least one external interrupt pin and an
additional data port. As a result, these patterns may be adapted without difficulty foruse with these families.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Simple, effective and with low software overheads.
There is two-way communication between Master and Slave.
There is a two-way mechanism for transferring data between the Master and
Slave.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 594
FIGURE  26.11 A shared-clock (interrupt) scheduler which supports bidirectional data transfers between
Master and Slave nodes.P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
module
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
module
Ack
TickPull-up resistors (5K)
on all P0 pins not shown Bidirectional
data transferwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 620 ---
Up to 30 bits of data may be transferred with each tick, if the ports are not
required for other purposes.
The system may be vulnerable to EMI unless sensible precautions are taken: see
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)[page 554].
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The other patterns in this chapter and throughout Part F provide alternative tech-
niques for linking together more than one microcontroller.
Example: Traffic lights
We repeat the traffic-light example again here, to illustrate some of the advantagesthat are obtained by providing both ‘data’ and ‘tick’ transfers.
Hardware
The hardware required is illustrated in Figure 26.12.SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 595
FIGURE  26.12 Hardware required for the SCI scheduler (data) version of the traffic-light controller example
[Note: that, for reliable operation, 10K pull-up resistors should be used on Port 0.]VccVccVccP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2
P 1.3
P 1.4
P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RST
P 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)
P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)
P 3.5 (T1)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)
P 0.3 (AD3)
P 0.4 (AD4)
P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)
P 2.5 (A13)
P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)
P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Master
VSS39
3837
36
353433
32
31
30
29
28
27
2625
24
232221123
4
567
8
9
10
1112
13
141516
17
18
19
2040
P 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2
P 1.3
P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6
P 1.7
RST
P 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)
P 3.2 (/INT0)
P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)
P 3.5 (T1)
P 3.6 (/WR)
P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)
P 0.3 (AD3)
P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)
P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)
P 2.3 (A11)
P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
Slave
VSS39
38
373635
34
3332
31
30
29
28
2726
25
242322
2112
345
6
78
9
10
11
121314
15
1617
18
19
2040
Reset/WD
(1232)
WD Refresh
Oscillator
moduleReset
(1812)
VccVccVccError
port
RRR
RedAmberGreenVcc
R
TickFlashError
port
RedAmberGreenVcc
RFlashAckwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 621 ---
Software – Master node
We present a key software listing (Listing 26.10) for the Master node in this version of
the scheduler here: the remainder of the files for this project will be found on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Dm.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK INTERRUPT SCHEDULER FOR 8051/52 *** MASTER NODE : DATA ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
--- Assumes '1232' watchdog on Slave ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCI_Dm.H"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
tByte Tick_message_data_G = RETURN_NORMAL;  
tByte Ack_message_data_G = RETURN_NORMAL;
// Used to detect Slave activity
bit First_call_G;bit Watchdog_input_previous_G;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// Used to reset system in event of Slave error (see Main.C)
extern bit System_reset_G;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 596www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 622 ---
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------
static void SCI_D_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(void);
static bit  SCI_D_MASTER_Process_Ack(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.You must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_MASTER_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //  (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// Now set up Timer 2// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteSCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 597www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 623 ---
TL2 = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 low byte
RCAP2L = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabled
TR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_MASTER_Start(void) 
{// Try to place system in 'safe' state at start or after errorsSCI_D_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Delay here to cause the Slave to time out and reset
// Adjust this delay to match the timeout periods on the SlavesHardware_Delay_T0(500);
// Now send first tick to start the Slave
// (starts on falling edge)Interrupt_output_pin = 1;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);Interrupt_output_pin = 0;Hardware_Delay_T0(5);
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Update_T2
This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCI_D_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 598www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 624 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Must manually clear this. // Get the ack message from the Slave
if (SCI_D_MASTER_Process_Ack() == RETURN_ERROR)
{// Did not receive ack!Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;
// Enter safe state and remain here until reset
SCI_D_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();while(1); }
// Send 'tick' message to the Slave
SCI_D_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(); 
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 599www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 625 ---
// Prepare for next tick
Interrupt_output_pin = 1;}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message()This function sends a tick message.The receipt of this message will cause an interrupt to be generated
in the Slave(s): this will, in turn, invoke the scheduler 'update' function in the Slave(s).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(void) 
{// Apply the tick data to the portSCI_transfer_port = Tick_message_data_G;
// Send tick (falling edge) to the Slave
Interrupt_output_pin = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Process_Ack()Checks that the Slave is operating.Reads data from the Slave.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit SCI_D_MASTER_Process_Ack(void) 
{if (First_call_G)
{// This is the first time this function has been calledFirst_call_G = 0;
// Prepare for subsequent checking of the watchdog pin
Watchdog_input_previous_G = Slave_watchdog_pin;}
else
{// Watchdog pin should change state every time// - if the Slave is running correctlyif (Watchdog_input_previous_G == Slave_watchdog_pin)MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 600www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 626 ---
{
// Error!return RETURN_ERROR;}
// Slave is OK
Watchdog_input_previous_G = Slave_watchdog_pin;}
// Set up port for reading
SCI_transfer_port = 0xFF;
// Read ack message
Ack_message_data_G = SCI_transfer_port;
return RETURN_NORMAL;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Slave node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Ack messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void) reentrant
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as required
// Here we display a safe output
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.10 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Master node)
[Note: that data transfer between Master and Slave (and vice versa) is supported in this version.]SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 601www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 627 ---
Software – Slave node
We present a key software listing (listing 26.11) for the Slave node in this version of
the scheduler here: the remainder of the files for this project will be found on the CD.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_Ds.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK SCHEDULER [INTERRUPT BASED] FOR 8051/52 *** SLAVE NODE ****** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ****** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (1 ms) ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCI_Ds.h"
#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Data sent from the Master to this Slave
tByte Tick_message_data_G = RETURN_NORMAL;
// Data sent from this Slave to the Master 
// - data may be sent on, by the Master, to another Slave  tByte Ack_message_data_G = RETURN_NORMAL; 
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCI_D_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);static void SCI_D_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void);
static void SCI_D_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void);
static void SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 602www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 628 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Init()
Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.
Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Init(void) 
{tByte i;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //  (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// ---------- External interrupt 0 ----------
// The Slave is driven by an interrupt input// The interrupt is enabled // It is triggered by a falling edge at pin P3.2IT0 = 1;EX0 = 1;
// Start the watchdog
SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Start()Starts the Slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{// Place system in a safe stateSCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 603www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 629 ---
// - Slave will keep returning here if Master does not start
// - or otherwise fails.SCI_D_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();
// Now in a safe state
// Wait here - indefinitely - for the first tick// (Refresh the watchdog to avoid constant watchdog restarts)while (IE0 == 0)
{SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// Clear the flag
IE0 = 0;
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCI_D_SLAVE_Init().
This Slave is triggered by external interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_EXTERNAL_0  
{tByte Index;
// Extract the tick-message data
SCI_D_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message();
// Send data back to Master       
SCI_D_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();
// Feed the watchdog 
SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Now do 'standard' scheduler updates// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 604www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 630 ---
{
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Incr. the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master()Slave must send and 'Acknowledge' message to the Master, after
tick messages are received.  
The acknowledge message serves two purposes:
[1] It confirms to the Master that the Slave is alive & well.[2] It provides a means of sending data to the Master.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void)
{SCI_Transfer_Port = Ack_message_data_G;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message()The ticks messages are crucial to the operation of this S-C
scheduler: the arrival of a tick message (at regular intervals) invokes the 'Update' ISR, that drives the scheduler.
The tick messages themselves may contain data.  These data are 
extracted in this function. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 605www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 631 ---
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void)
{// Set up port for readingSCI_Transfer_Port = 0xFF;
// Read the data
Tick_message_data_G = SCI_Transfer_Port;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.
If the Master fails (or other error develop), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the Slave.  This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state.  The Slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The Slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances.  The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required wwith different watchdog hardware//// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()Feed the external (1232) watchdog.Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)HARDWARE: Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 606www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 632 ---
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{static bit WATCHDOG_state;
// Change the state of the watchdog pin
if (WATCHDOG_state == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;}
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCI_D_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCI_D_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 26.11 Part of the software for a simple traffic system (Slave node). 
[Note that data transfer between Master and Slave (and vice versa) is supported in this version.]
Further reading
—SCI SCHEDULER (DATA) 607www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 633 ---
Shared-clock schedulers 
using the UART
Introduction
As we discussed in Chapter 18, UART-based data transfer is a straightforward proposi-
tion with the 8051 family, allowing information to be transferred to an embeddedapplication from a desktop PC and vice versa. In this chapter we demonstrate that theUART may also be used as the hardware foundation in a simple, low-cost techniquefor linking two or more microcontrollers together. 
Note that these patterns are suitable for both ‘local’ and ‘distributed’ networks. By
local networks, we mean applications containing multiple microcontrollers which aredisplaced by no more than a few centimetres; in most cases, the microcontrollers willbe contained in the same system box; indeed, they will usually be mounted on thesame PCB. In distributed networks, the microcontrollers may be displaced by consid-erable distances; in the case of RS-485 networks, for example, displacements of up to akilometre are possible and even longer distances can be achieved if ‘repeater’ boardsare added at kilometre intervals (e.g. see Sivasothy, 1998).chapter 27www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 634 ---
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on (and transfer data over) a local network of two (ormore) 8051 microcontrollers connected together via their UARTs?
Background
See Chapter 25 for general background material on shared-clock schedulers.
Solution
We consider how a UART-based, shared-clock scheduler can be designed in this section. 
The basis of the approach
All the shared-clock schedulers we discuss in this book have the same underlyingarchitecture (Figure 27.1).SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 609
FIGURE  27.1 The architecture of all the shared-clock schedulers discussed in this bookMaster Slave 1 Slave 2 Slave N
Tick messages (from master to slaves)Acknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
messagewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 635 ---
Here we have one, accurate clock on the Master node in the network. This clock is
used to drive the scheduler in the Master node in exactly the manner discussed in Part C. 
The Slave nodes also have schedulers: however, the interrupts used to drive these
schedulers are derived from ‘tick messages’ generated by the Master. Thus, in theUART-based network we are concerned with in this pattern, the Slave node(s) willhave a S-C scheduler driven by the ‘receive’ interrupts generated through the receiptof a byte of data sent by the Master.
Note that the ability to generate an interrupt (in a Slave) on receipt of a data byte
by the UART makes the underlying scheduler operation an extremely simple two-stage process:
1Timer overflow in the Master causes the scheduler ‘Update’ function to be invoked.
This, in turn, causes a byte of data to be sent (via the UART) to all Slaves:
void MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{
...
MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(...);...
}
2When these data have been received all Slaves generate an interrupt; this invokes
the ‘Update’ function in the Slave schedulers. This, in turn, causes one Slave tosend an ‘Acknowledge’ message back to the Master (again via the UART).
void SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_UART_Rx_Tx  
{
...
SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();
...}
The message structure
The design of the message structure to be used in a UART-based network requires
some care.
For example, consider Figure 27.2. Here we will assume that we wish to control and
monitor three hydraulic actuators to control the operation of a mechanical excavator. 
Suppose we wish to adjust the angle of Actuator A to 90º; how do we do this?
Immediately the 8-bit nature of the UART becomes a limitation, because we need tosend a message that identifies both the node to be adjusted and the angle itself.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 610www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 636 ---
There is no ideal way of addressing this problem. Here, we adopt the following
solution:
GEach Slave is given a unique ID (0x01 to 0xFF). 
GEach tick message from the Master is two bytes long; these two bytes are sent one tick
interval apart . The first byte is an ‘Address byte’, containing the ID of the Slave to
which the message is addressed. The second byte is the ‘Message byte’ and containsthe message data.
GAll Slaves generate interrupts in response to each byte of every tick message.
GOnly the Slave to which a tick message is addressed will reply to the Master; this
reply takes the form of an acknowledge message.
GEach acknowledge message from a Slave is two bytes long; the two bytes are, again,sent one tick interval apart. The first byte is an ‘Address byte’, containing the ID ofthe Slave from which the message is sent. The second byte is the ‘Message byte’and contains the message data.
GFor data transfers requiring more than a single byte of data, multiple messagesmust be sent (see 
DATA UNION [page 712] for useful techniques).
The transfer of messages is illustrated in Figure 27.3.
There remains one further problem; we need to be able to distinguish between
‘Address bytes’ and ‘Data bytes’, if we are to avoid possible confusion.SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 611
FIGURE  27.2 Controlling and monitoring the operation of a mechanical excavator with Slave nodes at
three locations (A, B and C), plus a Master node in the cabinAB
C
Main control
and user interface
(Master)Actuator A
(Slave)Actuator B
(Slave)Actuator C
(Slave)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 637 ---
We do this by making use of the fact that the 8051 allows transmission of 9-bit
serial data (Table 27.1).
In this configuration (typically, the UART used in Mode 3), 11 bits are transmitted /
received. Note that the ninth bit is transmitted via bit TB8 in the register SCON, andis received as bit RB8 in the same register. In this mode, the baud rate is controlled asdiscussed in Chapter 18.
In the code examples presented here and included on the CD, address bytes are
identified by setting the ‘command bit’ (TB8) to 1; data bytes set this bit to 0.
Determining the required baud rate
The timing of timer ticks in the Master is set to a duration such that one byte of a tick
message can be sent (and one byte of an acknowledge message received) betweenticks. Clearly, this duration depends on the network baud rate. 
As already discussed, we will use a 9-bit protocol. Taking into account start and
stop bits, we require 22 bits (11 for tick message, 11 for acknowledge message) perscheduler tick; that is, the required baud rate is: (scheduler ticks / second) ×22.
For example, if we require 1 ms ticks, this equates to a minimum baud rate of
22,000 baud: the ‘standard’ baud rate of 28,800 baud provides a good safety margin.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 612
FIGURE  27.3 The communication between the Master and (two) Slave nodes in a UART-based S-C
networkTick
message
(Address – S1)Ack
message
(Address – S1)Tick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(Data from S1)Tick
message
(Address – S2)Ack
message
(Address – S2)
Master tick (from timer)TimeSlave tick (from UART)
TABLE 27.1 The structure of 9-bit serial messages
Description Size (bits)
Data 9 bits
Start bit 1 bit
Stop bit 1 bit
Total 11 bits / messagewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 638 ---
Note that use of ‘standard’ baud rates may help during debugging, since (for
example) a PC can be easily used to monitor network traffic. However, standard ratesare not otherwise necessary: any baud rate compatible with all the network nodesmay be used. This can have advantages; for example, with the UART used in Mode 2,high-speed 9-bit serial operations are supported, but baud-rate timing does notrequire use of a timer. For example, a 12 Mhz / 12 oscillation per cycle 8051 can gen-erate 375,000 baud signals in Mode 2.
Note also that, as with any shared-clock network, there is a delay between the
timer on the Master and the UART-based interrupt on the Slave (Figure 27.4). Thisdelay arises because the Slave interrupt is generated at the end of the tick message. Inthe absence of network errors, this delay is fixed and derives largely from the timetaken to transmit a byte via the UART; that is, it varies with the baud rate. As dis-cussed earlier, most shared-clock applications employ a baud rate of at least 28,800baud: this gives a tick latency of approximately 0.4 ms. At 375,000 baud, this latencybecomes approximately 0.03 ms.
Note that this latency is fixed and can be accurately predicted on paper and then
confirmed in simulation and testing. If precise synchronization of Master and Slaveprocessing is required, then please note that:
GAll the Slaves operate – within the limits of measurement – precisely in step.
GTo bring the Master in step with the Slaves, it is necessary only to add a short delayin the Master ‘Update’ function.
Node hardware
Typical hardware for a network node is shown in Figure 27.5.SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 613
FIGURE  27.4 The latency between tick generation on the Master and on the SlavesTick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)
TimeTick latency(varies with baud rate)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 639 ---
Network wiring
Figure 27.6 shows how a two-node network should be connected, while Figure 27.7
shows the connections for a network with three or more Slaves. Note that all cablesshould be kept as short as possible; ideally, all microcontrollers should be located onthe same PCB.
Hardware resource implications
Clearly, the main hardware resource required is the UART; refer to the second exam-ple at the end of this pattern for techniques that may allow you to use this pattern incircumstances where a UART is also required for data transfers to a PC.
Note that this pattern does not necessarily require the use of a timer for baud-rate
generation; see ‘Solution’ for details.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 614
FIGURE  27.5a Possible hardware connections for local SCU networks, using an external 1232 watchdogP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset
(1812)
VccVccVccRedRRR
AmberGreenVcc
RVcc
RFlashErrorError
portwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 640 ---
Reliability and safety implications
Many of the reliability and safety considerations raised in connection with SCI
SCHEDULER (TICK )[page 554] also apply here.
Portability
Can be used with the whole 8051 family and many other microcontrollers / micro-
processor / DSP devices.SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 615
FIGURE  27.5b Possible hardware connections for local SCU networks, assuming an on-chip watchdogP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset/WD
(1232)
VccVccVccRedError
port
RRR
AmberGreenVcc
RVcc
RFlashErrorWD Refresh
FIGURE  27.6 Inter-node connections in a two-node (local) SCU scheduler8051-
family
micro8051-
family
microMasterP3.0(Rx)
Slave
P3.1(Tx)P3.0(Rx)
P3.1(Tx)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 641 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple scheduler for local systems with two or more 8051 microcontrollers.
All necessary hardware is part of the 8051 core: as a result, the technique is
very portable within this family.
Easy to implement with minimal CPU and memory overheads.The UART supports byte-based communications only: data transfer between
Master and Slaves (and vice versa) is limited to 0.5 bytes per clock tick.
Uses an important hardware resource (the UART).Most error detection / correction must be carried out in software.This pattern is not suitable for distributed systems.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SCU S CHEDULER [page 531] for an architecture suitable for use in multi-drop
networks and with the ability to transfer larger amounts of data between networknodes.
Example: A local UART scheduler library
We present a simple code library in this example (Listings 27.1 and 27.2).
The hardware shown in Figure 27.5 may be used here.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 616
FIGURE  27.7 Inter-node connections in a three-node (local) SCU scheduler8051-
family
micro8051-
family
microMaster8051-
family
microP3.0(Rx)
8051-
family
microSlave ...Slave 1
Slave NP3.1(Tx)
P3.0(Rx)
P3.1(Tx)P3.0(Rx)
P3.1(Tx)
P3.0(Rx)
P3.1(Tx)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 642 ---
Master/software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_Am.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an implementation of SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) for 8051/52.
AND an implementation of SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) for 8051/52. 
*** MASTER NODE ***
*** CHECKS FOR SLAVE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ****** Local / RS-232 version (no 'enable' support) ***
*** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ***
*** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (5 ms) ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCU_Am.H"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tByte Tick_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {'M'};  
tByte Ack_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES];
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private variable definitions -----------------------------static tByte Current_slave_index_G = 0;
static bit First_ack_G = 1;static bit WATCHDOG_state_G = 0
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCU_A_MASTER_Reset_the_Network(void);
static void SCU_A_Master_Shut_Down_the_Network(void);static void SCU_A_MASTER_Switch_To_Backup_Slave(const tByte);SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 617www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 643 ---
static void SCU_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte);
static bit  SCU_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte);
static void  SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void  SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Slave IDs may be any NON-ZERO tByte value (all must be different)
// NOTE: ID 0x00 is for error handling.static const tByte MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x31};static const tByte BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x31};
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) 
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)
// Adjust (if required) to increase interval between network resets
// (in the event of sustained network error)#define SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL 0U
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static tWord Slave_reset_attempts_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES];
// See MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[] above
static tByte Current_Slave)IDs_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0};
static bit Message_byte_G = 1;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Init_T1_T2()
Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.You must call this function before using the scheduler.  
BAUD_RATE - The required baud rate.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_MASTER_Init_T1_T2(const tWord BAUD_RATE) 
{tByte Task_index;tByte Slave_index;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// Start the watchdog
SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init();
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 618www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 644 ---
// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (Task_index = 0; Task_index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Task_index++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(Task_index);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// We allow any combination of ID numbers in slaves
// - but reserve ID 0x00for (Slave_index = 0; Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES; Slave_index++)
{Slave_reset_attempts_G[Slave_index] = 0;Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] = MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];}
// ------ Set the baud rate (begin) -----------------------------
PCON &= 0x7F;   // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don't double baud rates)
//  Receiver enabled
//  *9-bit data*, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, variable baud rate 
(asynchronous)
SCON = 0xD2;
TMOD |= 0x20;   // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reloadTH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));
TL1 = TH1;  
TR1 = 1;  // Run the timerTI = 1;   // Send first character (dummy)// ------ Set the baud rate (end) -------------------------------
// Serial interrupt *NOT* enabled
ES = 0;// ------ Set up the serial link (end) --------------------------
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz, 12 osc/increment//// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)
// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.005 seconds (5 ms)SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 619www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 645 ---
// - this takes 5000 timer ticks
// Reload value is 65536 - 5000 = 60536 (dec) = 0xEC78
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xEC;  // load timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xEC;  // load timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x78;  // load timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x78;  // load timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2   
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Start()
Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! NOTE: Delays here (2 ms) assume a baud rate of at least 9600 baud.
You will need to fine-tune this code if you opt for a lower baudrate.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_A_MASTER_Start(void) 
{tByte Slave_ID;tByte Num_active_slaves;tByte Id, i;bit First_byte = 0;bit Slave_replied_correctly;tByte Slave_index;
// Refresh the watchdog
SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Place system in 'safe state’
SCU_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Report error as we wait to start
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 620www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 646 ---
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Pause here (300 ms), to time-out all the slaves
// (This is the means by which we synchronize the network)for (i = 0; i < 100; i++)
{Hardware_Delay_T0(30);SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}     
// Currently disconnected from all slaves
Num_active_slaves = 0;
// After the initial (long) delay, all (operational) slaves will
have timed out.
// All operational slaves will now be in the 'READY TO START' state// Send them a (single-byte) message to get them started// DO THIS TWICE IN A ROW, WITH COMMAND BIT // This cannot happen under normal circumstancesSlave_index = 0;do {
// Refresh the watchdogSCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Clear 'first byte' flag
First_byte = 0;
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index];  
// Send a 'Slave ID' message
TI = 0;TB8 = 1; // Set command bitSBUF = Slave_ID;          
// Wait to give slave time to reply
Hardware_Delay_T0(5);   
// Check we had a reply 
if (RI == 1) 
{// Get the reply dataId = (tByte) SBUF;  RI = 0;
// Check reply - with command bit
if ((Id == Slave_ID) && (RB8 == 1))SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 621www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 647 ---
{
First_byte = 1;}
}   
// Send second byte
TI = 0;TB8 = 1;SBUF = Slave_ID;   
// Wait to give slave time to reply
Hardware_Delay_T0(5);   
// Check we had a reply
Slave_replied_correctly = 0;if (RI != 0)
{// Get the reply dataId = (tByte) SBUF;  RI = 0;
if ((Id == Slave_ID) && (RB8 == 1) && (First_byte == 1))
{Slave_replied_correctly = 1;}
}
if (Slave_replied_correctly)
{// Slave responded correctlyNum_active_slaves++;Slave_index++;}
else
{// Slave did not reply correctly // - try to switch to backup device (if available)if (Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] !=BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index])
{// There is a backup available: switch to backup and try// againCurrent_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] =BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 622www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 648 ---
else
{
// No backup available (or backup failed too) - have to// continue// NOTE: we don't abort the loop, to allow for moreflexible// error handling (below).Slave_index++;}
}
} while (Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES);
// DEAL WITH CASE OF MISSING SLAVE(S) HERE ...
if (Num_active_slaves < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{// User-defined error handling here...// 1 or more slaves have not replied// NOTE: In some circumstances you may wish to abort if slaves// are missing// - or reconfigure the network.
// Here we display error and shut down the network
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START;SCU_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network();}
else
{Error_code_G = 0;Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;}
// Get ready to send first tick message
Message_byte_G = 1;First_ack_G = 1;Current_slave_index_G = 0;
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Update_T2
This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCU_A_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 623www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 649 ---
void SCU_A_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Task_index;tByte Previous_slave_index;
TF2 = 0; // Must manually clear this. // Refresh the watchdog
SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Default
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Keep track of the current slave
// FIRST VALUE IS 0Previous_slave_index = Current_slave_index_G;   
// Assume 2-byte messages sent and received
// - it takes two ticks to deliver each messageif (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Message_byte_G = 1;  }
else
{Message_byte_G = 0;
if (++Current_slave_index_G >= NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{Current_slave_index_G = 0;}
}
// Check that the appropriate slave responded to the previous message:
// (if it did, store the data sent by this slave)if (SCU_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(Previous_slave_index) == RETURN_ERROR)
{Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;
// If we have lost contact with a slave, we attempt to
// switch to a backup device (if one is available) as we reset // the network//// NOTE: We don't do this every tick (or the the net will be
constantly reset)
//// Choose a value of SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL to allow resets (say)// every 5 secondsMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 624www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 650 ---
if (++Slave_reset_attempts_G[Previous_slave_index] >=
SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL)
{SCU_A_MASTER_Reset_the_Network();}
}
else
{// Reset this counterSlave_reset_attempts_G[Previous_slave_index] = 0}
// Send 'tick' message to all connected slaves
// (sends one data byte to the current slave)SCU_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(Current_slave_index_G);
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Task_index = 0; Task_index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Task_index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the RunMeflag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message()SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 625www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 651 ---
This function sends a tick message, over the USART network.
The receipt of this message will cause an interrupt to be generatedin the slave(s): this invoke the scheduler 'update' functionin the slave(s).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte SLAVE_INDEX) 
{tLong Timeout;
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
tByte Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[SLAVE_INDEX];
// Sending one byte of data at a time, depending on index value
// If Message_byte_G is 0, send first byte (the slave ID)if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Timeout = 0;while ((++Timeout) && (TI == 0));  
if (Timeout == 0)
{// UART did not respond - errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI; return;} 
TI = 0;                                            
TB8 = 1;  // Set 'Command' bitSBUF = Slave_ID;}
else
{// Message_byte_G is 1, send the data byte Timeout = 0;while ((++Timeout) && (TI == 0));  
if (Timeout == 0)
{// usart did not respond - errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI; return;} 
TI = 0;
TB8 = 0;SBUF = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX];}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 626www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 652 ---
// Data sent - return
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Process_Ack()
Make sure the slave (SLAVE_ID) has acknowledged the previous
message that was sent.  If it has, extract the message datafrom the USART hardware: if not, call the appropriate errorhandler.
Slave_index - The index of the slave.RETURNS:  RETURN_NORMAL - Ack received (data in Ack_message_data_G)
RETURN_ERROR  - No ack received (-> no data)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit SCU_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte Slave_index) 
{tByte Message_contents;tByte Slave_ID;
// First time this is called there is no ack tick to check 
// - we simply return 'OK'if (First_ack_G)
{First_ack_G = 0;return RETURN_NORMAL;}
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index];
// Data should already be in the buffer
if (RI == 0)
{// Slave has not replied to last tick message
// Set error LED
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
return RETURN_ERROR;
} 
// There is data - get it
Message_contents = (tByte) SBUF;RI = 0;
// This is the reply to the last message 
// - reverse the message byte interpretation SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 627www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 653 ---
if (Message_byte_G == 1)
{// Check the 'command bit' is setif (RB8 == 1)
{// Check that the ID is correctif (Slave_ID == (tByte) Message_contents)
{// Required Ack message was receivedreturn RETURN_NORMAL;}
}
// Something is wrong...
// Set error LEDNetwork_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
return RETURN_ERROR;
}
else
{  // There *ARE* data available // Extract the data from the slave message//// NOTE: We *assume* these data are OK// - you may wish to send crucial data twice, etc.Ack_message_data_G[Slave_index] = Message_contents;
return RETURN_NORMAL;  // return the slave data
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Reset_the_Network()This function resets (that ism restarts) the whole network.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_MASTER_Reset_the_Network(void)
{EA = 0;    // Disable interruptswhile(1);  // Watchdog will time out}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network()
This function shuts down the whole network.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 628www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 654 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network(void)
{EA = 0; // Disable interrupts
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not running - do this manually
while(1)
{SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}
}
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCU_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node cannot detect a slave(3) The network has an error
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe’ state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.If the Master fails (or other error develop), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the slave.  This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state.  The slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances.  The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 629www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 655 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required wwith different watchdog hardware// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh()
Feed the external (1232) watchdog.
Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{// Change the state of the watchdog pinif (WATCHDOG_state_G == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;} 
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 27.1 Part of a local UART scheduler library (Master node)
Slave software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_As.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an implementation of SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) for 8051/52.
AND an implementation of SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) for 8051/52.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 630www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 656 ---
*** SLAVE NODE ***
***Local / RS-232 version (no 'enable' support) ***
*** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ****** Assumes 12 MHz osc (same as Master) ***
*** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (5 ms) ****** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCU_As.h"
#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// Data sent from the master to this slave
tByte Tick_message_data_G;
// Data sent from this slave to the master 
// - data may be sent on, by the master, to another slave  tByte Ack_message_data_G = 'S'; 
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void  SCU_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);static void  SCU_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void);
static tByte SCU_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void);
static void  SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void  SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Each slave must have a unique (non-zero) ID 
#define SLAVE_ID 0x31
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) 
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 631www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 657 ---
static bit Message_byte_G;
static bit WATCHDOG_state_G = 0static tByte Message_ID_G = 0
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Init_T1()
Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
BAUD_RATE - The required baud rate
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Init_T1(const tWord BAUD_RATE) 
{tByte i;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// Set the network error pin (reset when tick message received)
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// Ready for first tick message
Message_byte_G = 1;
// ------ Set the baud rate (begin) -----------------------------
PCON &= 0x7F;   // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don’t double baud rates)
//  receiver enabled
//  9-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, variable baud rate //  (asynchronous)SCON = 0xD2;
TMOD |= 0x20;   // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reloadTH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));
TL1 = TH1;  
TR1 = 1;  // Run the timerTI = 1;   // Send first character (dummy)MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 632www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 658 ---
// ------ Set the baud rate (end) -------------------------------
// Interrupt enabled
// (Both receiving and SENDING a byte will generate a serial interrupt)
// Global interrupts not yet enabled.
ES = 1;
// Start the watchdog
SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Start()
Starts the slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{tByte Command = 0;tByte Message_byte;tByte Count = 0;bit Slave_started = 0;
// Disable interrupts 
EA = 0;
// We can be at this point because:
// 1. The network has just been powered up// 2. An error has occurred in the Master, and it is not generating// ticks// 3. The network has been damaged and no ticks are being received// by this slave//// Try to make sure the system is in a safe state...SCU_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();
// NOTE: Interrupts are disabled here
Count = 0;
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Now wait (indefinitely) for appropriate signals from the master
do {
// Wait for tick messages (byte 1), all bits set to 0, to be// received SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 633www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 659 ---
do {
SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(); // Must keep feeding the
watchdog
} while (RI == 0);  
Message_byte = (tByte) SBUF; 
RI = 0;// Must get two ID messages in a row...// (with command bit)// Ack each oneif ((Message_byte == (tByte) SLAVE_ID) && (RB8 == 1))
{Count++;
// Received message for this slave - send ack
TI = 0;                                            TB8 = 1; // Set command bitSBUF = (tByte) SLAVE_ID;  }
else
{Count = 0;}
} while (Count < 2);
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCU_A_SLAVE_Init().
This Slave is triggered by USART interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_UART_Rx_Tx  
{tByte Index;
if (RI == 1) // Must check this. 
{// DefaultNetwork_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Two-byte messages are sent (Ack) and received (Tick)
// - it takes two sched ticks to process each messageMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 634www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 660 ---
//
// Keep track of the current byteif (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Message_byte_G = 1;}
else
{Message_byte_G = 0;}
// Check tick data - send ack if necessary
// NOTE: 'START' message will only be sent after a 'time out'if (SCU_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message() == SLAVE_ID)
{SCU_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();
// Feed the watchdog ONLY when a *relevant* message is
// received// (noise on the bus, etc, will not stop the watchdog...)//// START messages will NOT refresh the slave// - Must talk to every slave at regular intervals SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe = 1;  // Set the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 635www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 661 ---
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;
}
}         
}
RI = 0;  // Reset the RI flag   }
else
{
// ISR call was triggered by TI flag, after last character was sent
// Must clear the TI flagTI = 0;}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master()Slave must send and 'Acknowledge' message to the master, after
tick messages are received.  NOTE: Only tick messages specificallyaddressed to this slave should be acknowledged.
The acknowledge message serves two purposes:
[1] It confirms to the master that this slave is alive & well.[2] It provides a means of sending data to the master and - hence
- to other slaves.
NOTE: Direct data transfer between slaves is NOT possible.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void)
{// Sending one byte of data at a time, depending on index value// If Message_byte_G is 0, send first byte (the slave ID)if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{TI = 0;                                            TB8 = 1;  // Set 'Command' bitSBUF = SLAVE_ID;}
else
{// Message_byte_G is 1, send the data byte TI = 0;TB8 = 0;SBUF = Ack_message_data_G;}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 636www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 662 ---
// Data sent - return    
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message()The ticks messages are crucial to the operation of this shared-clock
scheduler: the arrival of a tick message (at regular intervals) invokes the 'Update' ISR, that drives the scheduler.
The tick messages themselves may contain data.  These data are 
extracted in this function. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCU_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void)
{tByte Data;
// Try to get data byte
if (RI == 0)
{// No data - something is wrong
// Set the error flag bit
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// Return slave ID 0
return 0x00;} 
// There *ARE* data available
Data = (tByte) SBUF;RI = 0;  // Clear RI flag
// What we do with this message depends if it is a first or second
byte
if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{// This is (should be) an ID byteMessage_ID_G = Data;   
if (RB8 == 0)
{Message_ID_G = 0;  // Command bit should be set}
}
else
{// This is (should be) a data byte// - Command bit should not be setSCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 637www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 663 ---
if ((Message_ID_G == SLAVE_ID) && (RB8 == 0))
{Tick_message_data_G = Data;}
else
{// Something is wrong - set Message_ID to 0Message_ID_G = 0; 
// Set the error flag bit
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;}
}
return Message_ID_G;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.If the Master fails (or other error develop), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the slave.  This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state.  The slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances.  The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required with different watchdog hardware//// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 638www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 664 ---
Feed the external (1232) watchdog.
Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{// Change the state of the watchdog pinif (WATCHDOG_state_G == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;} 
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails, and no working backup is available(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe’ state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 27.2 Part of a local UART scheduler library (Slave node)SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 639www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 665 ---
Example: A 3-node local scheduler
See CD for details.
Example: A 2-node local scheduler with backup Slave
See CD for details.
Example: Adding an additional UART
As we saw in Chapter 18, using scheduled ‘RS-232’ comms to transfer data to and
from a PC is straightforward (Figure 27.8).
Suppose, however, that you are using a UART-based scheduler to link two micro-
controllers and you also need to create a link to a desktop PC: in most cases, you willnot have a second UART to set up the link to the PC (Figure 27.9).
There are several possibilities:
GUse an 8051 with more than one UART: for example, several of the Dallas micro-
controllers have this facility, as do the Infineon c517 and c509.
GAdd an external UART, such as the Maxim Max3110E (which has an SPI interface).
GUse CAN to link the nodes together and reserve the UART for communication withthe PC: see 
SCC SCHEDULER [page 677] for details.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 640
FIGURE  27.8 Using an RS-232 link to transfer data to and from a desktop PC8051-
family
microRS-232
FIGURE  27.9 How do we use a microcontroller with a single UART to communicate with another
microcontroller using a UART-based scheduler and to transfer data to and from a desktopPC over an RS-232 link?Master Slave?
RS-232 networkwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 666 ---
GUse a combination of a UART scheduler and an interrupt scheduler (linked to one
board): see Figure 27.10.
Further reading
—SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL) 641
FIGURE  27.10 Using a combination of a UART scheduler and an interrupt schedulerMaster SlaveRS-232
RS-232 networkSlaveInterrupt networkwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 667 ---
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on (and transfer data over) a distributed network of two8051 microcontrollers communicating using the RS-232 protocol?
Background
See Chapter 18 for background information on the RS-232 protocol.
See SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609] for details of the required software.
Solution
This pattern extends SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609]; the key difference between
the two patterns is that SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) allows the creation of two-node,
distributed networks, by making use of RS-232-compatible transceiver hardware.Figure 27.11 shows one possible node configuration, where an external 1232 watch-dog timer is employed.
Figure 27.12 shows a suitable node configuration where you have an on-board
watchdog timer.
Hardware resource implications
Clearly, the main (microcontroller) hardware resource required is the UART; refer tothe second example at the end of 
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609] for techniques
that may allow you to use this pattern in circumstances where a UART is also requiredfor data transfers to a PC.
Note that this pattern does not necessarily require the use of a timer for baud-rate
generation; see the ‘Solution’ section in 
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )for details.
Reliability and safety implications
Many of the reliability and safety considerations raised in connection with SCI
SCHEDULER (TICK)[page 554] also apply here.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 642www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 668 ---
Portability
Can be used with the whole 8051 family and many other microcontrollers / micro-
processor / DSP devices.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple scheduler for distributed systems of two 8051 microcontrollers.
All necessary hardware (apart from transceivers) is part of the 8051 core: as a
result, the technique is very portable within this family.
Easy to implement with minimal CPU and memory overheads.The UART supports byte-based communications only: data transfer between
Master and Slaves (and vice versa) is limited to 0.5 bytes per clock tick.SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) 643
FIGURE  27.11 An example node configuration for UART-based scheduler, where an external 1232
watchdog timer is employed
1
6 95
Max
233Vcc
1.0 µF
19
18 1
20
6,97
TxRx
Connect together:
Pins 12 and 17Pins 11 and 15Pins 16 and 10P 1.0 [T2]P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset/WD
(1232)
VccVccVccRedError
port
RRR
AmberGreenVcc
RVcc
RFlashErrorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 669 ---
Uses an important hardware resource (the UART). 
Most error detection / correction must be carried out in software. 
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) [page 646] for a similar scheduler suitable for use in
multi-drop networks.
See SCC SCHEDULER [page 677] for a scheduler suitable for use in multi-drop
networks and with the ability to transfer larger amounts of data between networknodes.
Example: Traffic lights 
Any of the two-node examples from SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609] may be
applied here, using a hardware platform based on Figure 27.11 or Figure 27.12.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 644
FIGURE  27.12 An example node configuration for UART-based scheduler, where an internal watchdog
timer is employed
1
6 95
Max
233Vcc
1.0 µF
19
18 1
20
6,97
TxRx
Connect together:
Pins 12 and 17Pins 11 and 15Pins 16 and 10P 1.0 [T2]P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset
(1812)
VccVccVccRedError
port
RRR
AmberGreenVcc
RVcc
RFlashErrorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 670 ---
Further reading
Axelson, J. (1998) Serial Port Complete , Lakeview Research.SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232) 645www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 671 ---
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of
the 8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on (and transfer data over) a distributed network of two(or more) 8051 microcontrollers communicating using the RS-485 protocol?
Background
The key characteristics of a shared-clock scheduler were discussed in Chapter 25. 
Solution
The communications standard generally referred to as ‘RS-485’ is an electrical specifi-cation for what are often referred to as ‘multi-point’ or ‘multi-drop’ communicationsystems; for our purposes, this means applications that involve at least three nodes,each containing a microcontroller.
Note that the specification document (EIA/TIA-485-A) defines the electrical
characteristics of the line and its drivers and receivers: this is the limit of the standard.Thus, unlike ‘RS-232’, there is no discussion of software protocols or of connectors.
We discussed the RS-232 protocol in connection with 
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
[page 642] and PC LINK (RS-232) [page 362]. There are many similarities between
RS-232 and RS-485 communication protocols:
GBoth are serial standards.
GBoth are in widespread use.
GBoth involve – for our purposes – the use of an appropriate transceiver chipconnected to a UART.
GBoth involve very similar software libraries.
There are also some key differences:
GRS-232 is a single-wire standard (one signal line, per channel, plus ground).
Electrical noise in the environment can lead to data corruption. This restricts thecommunication range to a maximum of around 30 metres and the data rate toaround 115 kbaud (with recent drivers).MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 646www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 672 ---
GRS-485 is a two-wire or differential communication standard. This means that, for
each channel, two lines carry (1) the required signal and (2) the inverse of thesignal. The receiver then detects the voltage difference between the two lines.
Electrical noise will impact on both lines, and will cancel out when the differenceis calculated at the receiver. As a result, an RS-485 network can extend as far as1 km, at a data rate of 90 kbaud. Faster data rates (up to 10 Mbaud) are possible atshorter distances (up to 15 metres).
GRS-232 is a peer-to-peer communications standard. For our purposes, this meansthat it is suitable for applications that involve two nodes, each containing a micro-controller (or, as we saw in Chapter 18, for applications where one node is adesktop, or similar, PC).
GRS-485 is a ‘multi-point’ or ‘multi-drop’ communications standard. Larger RS-485networks can have up to 32 ‘unit loads’: by using high-impedance receivers, youcan have as many as 256 nodes on the network.
GRS-232 requires low-cost ‘straight’ cables, with three wires for fully duplex commu-nications (Tx, Rx, ground).
GFor full performance, RS-485 requires twisted-pair cables, with two twisted pairs,plus ground (and usually a screen). This cabling is more bulky and more expensivethan the RS-232 equivalent.
GRS-232 cables do not require terminating resistors.
GRS-485 cables are usually used with 120 Ωterminating resistors (assuming 24-AWG
twisted pair cables) connected in parallel, at or just beyond the final node at both
ends of the network (Figure 27.13). The terminations reduce voltage reflectionsthat can otherwise cause the receiver to misread logic levels. 
GRS-232 transceivers are simple and standard.
GChoice of RS-485 transceivers depends on the application. A common choicefor basic systems is the Maxim
5Max489 family (see Figures 27.13 and 27.14).
For increased reliability, the Linear Technology6LTC1482, National
Semiconductors7 DS36276 and the Maxim Max3080–89 series all have internal
circuitry to protect against cable short-circuits. Also, the Maxim Max MAX1480contains its own transformer-isolated supply and opto-isolated signal path: thiscan help avoid interaction between power lines and network cables destroyingyour microcontroller.SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 647
5.www.maxim-ic.com
6.www.national.com
7.www.linear-tech.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 673 ---
Software considerations: enable inputs
The software required in this pattern is, in almost all respects, identical to that pre-
sented in SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609]. The only exception is the need, in this
multi-node system, to control the ‘enable’ inputs on the RS-485 transceivers; this isdone because only one such device can be active on the network at any time.
The time-triggered nature of the shared-clock scheduler makes the controlled acti-
vation of the various transceivers straightforward: refer to the code examples thatfollow for details.
Hardware resource implications
Clearly, the main (microcontroller) hardware resource required is the UART; refer tothe second example at the end of 
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609] for techniques
that may allow you to use this pattern in circumstances where a UART is also requiredfor data transfers to a PC.
Note that this pattern does not necessarily require the use of a timer for baud-rate
generation; see the ‘Solution’ section in 
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )for details.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 648
FIGURE  27.13 Possible (twisted-pair) cabling for an RS-485 network
[Note: that the RS-485 specification recommends connecting a 100W resistor (0.5 W or more) in series between each node’s signal grou nd
and the network’s ground wire.  This helps to ensure that if the ground potentials on the nodes vary, current flow in the groun d wire
is limited.]120Ω 120Ω
120Ω 120Ω
MASTER SLAVE 1 SLAVE 2100Ω 100Ω 100Ωwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 674 ---
Reliability and safety implications
Refer to page 552 for a discussion of the reasons why use of multiple microcontrollers
may decrease the system reliability.
However, if a distributed solution is required, the fact that RS-485 is a differential
communication standard means that applications based on this pattern will tend tohave a good level of noise immunity. 
Portability
This pattern can be used with the whole 8051 family and many other micro-controllers / microprocessor / DSP devices.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple scheduler for distributed systems consisting of multiple 8051 micro-controllers.SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 649
FIGURE  27.14 A simple node for an RS-485-based network485-OAMax
489Vcc
2
543
6,714
12
11
9
10485-1A
485-IB
485-OB
485-GND
100 RP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset/WD
moduleError
port
Vcc
RErrorWD Refreshwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 675 ---
Easy to implement with low CPU and memory overheads.
Twisted-pair cabling and differential signals make this more robust than
RS-232-based alternatives.
UART supports byte-based communications only: data transfer between Master
and Slaves (and vice versa) is limited to 0.5 bytes per clock tick. 
Uses an important hardware resource (the UART). The hardware still has a very limited ability to detect errors: most error detection
/ correction must be carried out in software. 
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SCC SCHEDULER [page 677] for an alternative scheduler suitable for use in
multi-drop networks and with the ability to transfer larger amounts of data betweennetwork nodes.
Example: Network with Max489 transceivers
In this example, we present a code framework for an SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
suitable for use with network nodes like that illustrated in Figure 27.15 (Listings 27.3and 27.4).
Master software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_Bm.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an implementation of SCU Scheduler (RS-485) for 8051/52. *** MASTER NODE ***
*** CHECKS FOR SLAVE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ****** Includes support for transceiver enables ***
--- Assumes 12.00 MHz crystal -> 5ms tick rate ---
--- Master and slave(s) share same tick rate ---
--- Assumes '1232' watchdog on Master and Slave ---
*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCU_Bm.H"
#include "Delay_T0.h"#include "TLight_B.h"MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 650www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 676 ---
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
tByte Tick_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {'M'};  tByte Ack_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES];
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private variable definitions -----------------------------
static tByte Current_slave_index_G = 0;static bit First_ack_G = 1;static bit WATCHDOG_state_G = 0;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------
static viod SCU_B_MASTER_Reset_the_Network(void);static void SCU_B_MASTER_Shut-Down_the Network(void);static void SCU_B-MASTER_Switch_To_Backup_Slave(const tByte);SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 651
FIGURE  27.15 A node for an RS-485-based network485-OAMax
489Vcc
2
543
6,714
12
11
9
10485-1A
485-IB
485-OB
485-GND
100 RP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
‘8051’
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Oscillator
moduleReset/WD
moduleError
port
Vcc
RErrorWD Refresh
VccVccVccRedRRR
AmberGreenVcc
RFlashwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 677 ---
static void SCU_B-MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte);
static bit  SCU_B-MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte);
static void SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
// ----- Private constants -----------------------------------------
// Slave IDs may be any NON-ZERO tByte value (all must be different)// NOTE: ID 0x00 is for error handling.static const tByte MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x31};static const tByte BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x31};
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) 
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)
// Adjust (if required) to increase interval between network resets
// (in the event of sustained network error)#define SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL 0U
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static tWord Slave_reset_attempts_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES];
// See MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[] above
static tByte Current_Slave_IDs_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0};
static bit Message_byte_G = 1;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Init_T1_T2()
Scheduler initialisation function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.You must call this function before using the scheduler.  
BAUD_RATE - The required baud rate.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_B_MASTER_Init_T1_T2(const tWord BAUD_RATE) 
{tByte Task_index;tByte Slave_index;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// Start the watchdog
SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Init();
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;// Set up RS-485 transceiver
RS485_Rx_NOT_Enable = 0;  // Master Rec is constantly enabledRS485_Tx_Enable = 1;      // Master Tran is constantly enabledMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 652www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 678 ---
// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (Task_index = 0; Task_index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Task_index++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(Task_index);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// We allow any combination of ID numbers in slaves
// - but reserve ID 0x00for (Slave_index = 0; Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES; Slave_index++)
{Slave_reset_attempts_G[Slave_index] = 0;Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] = MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];}
// ------ Set the baud rate (begin) -----------------------------
PCON &= 0x7F;   // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don’t double baud rates)
//  Receiver enabled
//  *9-bit data*, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, variable baud rate(asynchronous)SCON = 0xD2;
TMOD |= 0x20;   // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reloadTH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));
TL1 = TH1;  TR1 = 1;  // Run the timerTI = 1;   // Send first character (dummy)// ------ Set the baud rate (end) -------------------------------
// Serial interrupt *NOT* enabled
ES = 0;// ------ Set up the serial link (end) --------------------------
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz, 12 osc/increment//// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.005 seconds (5 ms)// - this takes 5000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 5000 = 60536 (dec) = 0xEC78SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 653www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 679 ---
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xEC;  // load timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xEC;  // load timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x00;  // load timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x00;  // load timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2   
// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
NOTE: Delays here (2 ms) assume a baud rate of at leadt 9600 baud.
You will need to fine-tune this code if you opt for a lower baudrate.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_B_MASTER_Start(void) 
{tByte Slave_ID;tByte Num_active_slaves;tByte Id, i;bit First_byte = 0;bit Slave_replied_correctly;tByte Slave_index;
// Refresh the watchdog
SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Place system in ‘safe state’
SCU_B_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Report error as we wait to start
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Pause here (3000 ms), to time-out all the slaves
// (This is the means by which we synchronize the network)for (i = 0; i < 100; i++)MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 654www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 680 ---
{
Hardware_Delay_T0(30);SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}     
// Currently disconnected from all slaves
Num_active_slaves = 0;
// After the initial (long) delay, all (operational) slaves will
// have timed out.// All operational slaves will now be in the 'READY TO START' state// Send them a (single-byte) message to get them started// DO THIS TWICE IN A ROW, WITH COMMAND BIT // This cannot happen under normal circumstancesSlave_index = 0;do {
// Refresh the watchdogSCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Clear 'first byte' flag
First_byte = 0;
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index];  
// Send a 'Slave ID' message
TI = 0;TB8 = 1; // Set command bitSBUF = Slave_ID;          
// Wait to give slave time to reply
Hardware_Delay_T0(5);   
// Check we had a reply 
if (RI == 1) 
{// Get the reply dataId = (tByte) SBUF;  RI = 0;
// Check reply - with command bit
if ((Id == Slave_ID) && (RB8 == 1))
{First_byte = 1;}
}   
// Send second byte
TI = 0;SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 655www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 681 ---
TB8 = 1;
SBUF = Slave_ID;   
// Wait to give slave time to reply
Hardware_Delay_T0(5);   
// Check we had a reply
Slave_replied_correctly = 0;if (RI != 0)
{// Get the reply dataId = (tByte) SBUF;  RI = 0;
if ((Id == Slave_ID) && (RB8 == 1) && (First_byte == 1))
{Slave_replied_correctly = 1;}
}
if (Slave_replied_correctly)
{// Slave responded correctlyNum_active_slaves++;Slave_index++;}
else
{// Slave did not reply correctly // - try to switch to backup device (if available)if (Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] !=BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index])
{// There is a backup available: switch to backup and try// againCurrent_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] =BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];}
else
{// No backup available (or backup failed too) - have to// continue
// NOTE: we don’t abort the loop, to allow for more flexible
// error handling (below)Slave_index++;}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 656www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 682 ---
}
} while (Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES);
// DEAL WITH CASE OF MISSING SLAVE(S) HERE ...
if (Num_active_slaves < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{// User-defined error handling here...// 1 or more slaves have not replied// NOTE: In some circumstances you may wish to abort if slaves// are missing// - or reconfigure the network.
// Here we display error and shut down the network
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START;SCU_B_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network();}
else
{Error_code_G = 0;Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;}
// Get ready to send first tick message
Message_byte_G = 1First_ack_G = 1;Current_slave_index_G = 0;
// Start the scheduler
EA = 1;   }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Update_T2This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCU_B_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_B_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Task_index;tByte Previous_slave_index;
TF2 = 0; // Must manually clear this. // Refresh the watchdog
SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 657www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 683 ---
// Default
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Keep track of the current slave
// FIRST VALUE IS 0Previous_slave_index = Current_slave_index_G;   
// Assume 2-byte messages sent and received
// - it takes two ticks to deliver each messageif (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Message_byte_G = 1;  }
else
{Message_byte_G = 0;
if (++Current_slave_index_G >= NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{Current_slave_index_G = 0;}
}
// Check that the appropriate slave responded to the previous message:
// (if it did, store the data sent by this slave)if (SCU_B_MASTER_Process_Ack(Previous_slave_index) == RETURN_ERROR)
{Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;
// If we have lost contact with a slave, we attempt to
// switch to a backup device (if one is available) as we reset// the network//// NOTE: We don’t do this every tick (or the the network will be// constantly reset)//// Choose a value of SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL to allow resets (say)// every 5 secondsif (++Slave_reset_attempts_G[Previous_slave_index] >=SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL)
{// Now reset the networkSCU_B_MASTER_Reset_the_Network();}
}
elseMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 658www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 684 ---
{
// Reset this counterSlave_reset_attempts_G[Previous_slave_index] = 0}
// Send 'tick' message to all connected slaves
// (sends one data byte to the current slave)SCU_B_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(Current_slave_index_G);
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Task_index = 0; Task_index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Task_index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the run
// flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay =SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Task_index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message()This function sends a tick message, over the USART network.
The receipt of this message will cause an interrupt to be generatedin the slave(s): this invokes the scheduler 'update' functionin the slave(s).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 659www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 685 ---
void SCU_B_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte SLAVE_INDEX) 
{tLong Timeout;
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
tByte Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[SLAVE_INDEX];
// Sending one byte of data at a time, depending on index value
// If Message_byte_G is 0, send first byte (the slave ID)if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Timeout = 0;while ((++Timeout) && (TI == 0));  
if (Timeout == 0)
{// UART did not respond - errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI; return;} 
TI = 0;                                            
TB8 = 1;  // Set 'Command' bitSBUF = Slave_ID;}
else
{// Message_byte_G is 1, send the data byte Timeout = 0;while ((++Timeout) && (TI == 0));  
if (Timeout == 0)
{// usart did not respond - errorError_code_G = ERROR_USART_TI; return;
} 
TI = 0;TB8 = 0;SBUF = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX];}
// Data sent - return
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 660www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 686 ---
SCU_B_MASTER_Process_Ack()
Make sure the slave (SLAVE_ID) has acknowledged the previous
message that was sent.  If it has, extract the message datafrom the USART hardware: if not, call the appropriate errorhandler.
Slave_index - The index of the slave.
RETURNS:  RETURN_NORMAL - Ack received (data in Ack_message_data_G)
RETURN_ERROR  - No ack received (-> no data)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit SCU_B_MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte Slave_index) 
{tByte Message_contents;tByte Slave_ID;
// First time this is called there is no ack tick to check 
// - we simply return ‘OK’if (First_ack_G)
{First_ack_G = 0;return RETURN_NORMAL;}
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index];
// Data should already be in the buffer
if (RI == 0)
{// Slave has not replied to last tick message
// Set error LED
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
return RETURN_ERROR;
} 
// There is data - get it
Message_contents = (tByte) SBUF;
RI = 0;
// This is the reply to the last message 
// - reverse the message byte interpretation if (Message_byte_G == 1)
{// Check the ‘command bit’ is setif (RB8 == 1)
{SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 661www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 687 ---
// Check that the ID is correct
if (Slave_ID == (tByte) Message_contents)
{// Required Ack message was receivedreturn RETURN_NORMAL;}
}
// Something is wrong...// Set error LED
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
return RETURN_ERROR;
}
else
{  // There *ARE* data available // Extract the data from the slave message//// NOTE: We *assume* these data are OK// - you may wish to send crucial data twice, etc.Ack_message_data_G[Slave_index] = Message_contents;
return RETURN_NORMAL;  // return the slave data
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Reset_the_Network()This function resets (that is, restarts) the whole network.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_MASTER_Reset_the_Network(void)
{EA = 0;while(1);  // Watchdog will time out}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network()This function shuts down the whole network.
*------------------------------------------------------------------*-/
void SCU_B_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network(void)
{EA = 0; // Disable interruptsMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 662www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 688 ---
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not running - do this manually
while(1)
{SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node cannot detect a slave(3) The network has an error
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.If the Master fails (or other error develops), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the slave. This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state. The slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances. The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 663www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 689 ---
// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG
// - May be required with different watchdog hardware// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh()Feed the external (1232) watchdog.Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void SCU_B_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{// Change the state of the watchdog pinif (WATCHDOG_state == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;} 
}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 27.3 Part of the software for shared-clock (UART) scheduler demonstration
system (Master node)
[Note: Network supports Max489 transceivers and uses the RS-485 protocol.]
Slave software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_Bs.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an implementation of SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) for 8051/52. MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 664www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 690 ---
*** SLAVE / BACKUP NODE ***
*** MASTER CHECKS FOR SLAVE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ****** Includes support for transceiver enables ***
*** Uses 1232 watchdog timer ****** Assumes 12 MHz osc (same as Master) ****** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate (5 ms) ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCU_Bs.h"
#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// Data sent from the master to this slave
tByte Tick_message_data_G;
// Data sent from this slave to the master 
// - data may be sent on, by the master, to another slave tByte Ack_message_data_G = 'S'; 
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void  SCU_B_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);static void  SCU_B_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void);
static tByte SCU_B_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void);
static void  SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void  SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Each slave must have a unique ID 
#define SLAVE_ID 0x31
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) 
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 665www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 691 ---
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static bit Message–byte_G;
static bit WATCHDOG_state_G = 0static tByte Message_ID_G = 0
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Init_T1()
Scheduler initialisation function. Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
BAUD_RATE - The required baud rate
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Init_T1(const tWord BAUD_RATE) 
{tByte i;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// Set the network error pin (reset when tick message received)
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// Set up RS-485 transceiver
RS485_Rx_NOT_Enable = 0;  // Receiver is (here) constantly enabled
// (NOTE - negative logic!)
RS485_Tx_Enable = 0;     // Transmitter (in slave) is enabled 
// only when data are to be transmitted// by this slave
// Ready for first tick message
Message_byte_G = 1;
// ------ Set the baud rate (begin) -----------------------------
PCON &= 0x7F;   // Set SMOD bit to 0 (don't double baud rates)
//  receiver enabled
//  9-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, variable baud rate//  (asynchronous)SCON = 0xD2;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 666www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 692 ---
TMOD |= 0x20;   // T1 in mode 2, 8-bit auto reload
TH1 = (256 - (tByte)((((tLong)OSC_FREQ / 100) * 3125) 
/ ((tLong) BAUD_RATE * OSC_PER_INST * 1000)));
TL1 = TH1;  
TR1 = 1;  // Run the timerTI = 1;   // Send first character (dummy)
// ------ Set the baud rate (end) -------------------------------// Interrupt enabled
// (Both receiving and SENDING a byte will generate a serial interrupt)
// Global interrupts not yet enabled.
ES = 1;
// Start the watchdog
SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Start()
Starts the slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{tByte Command = 0;tByte Message_byte;tByte Count = 0;bit Slave_started = 0;
// Disable interrupts 
EA = 0;
// We can be at this point because:
// 1. The network has just been powered up// 2. An error has occurred in the Master, and it is not generating//   ticks// 3. The network has been damaged and no ticks are being received//    by this slave//// Try to make sure the system is in a safe state...SCU_B_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 667www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 693 ---
// NOTE: Interrupts are disabled here
Count = 0;
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Now wait (indefinitely) for appropriate signals from the master
do {
// Wait for tick messages (byte 1), all bits set to 0, to be// received do {
SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(); // Must keep feeding the
// watchdog
} while (RI == 0);  
Message_byte = (tByte) SBUF; 
RI = 0;
// Must get two ID messages in a row...
// (with command bit)// Ack each oneif ((Message_byte == (tByte) SLAVE_ID) && (RB8 == 1))
{Count++;
// Received message for this slave - send ack
// Must enable the slave RS-485 (Max489) hardware (Tx)RS485_Tx_Enable = 1;
TI = 0;                                            
TB8 = 1; // Set command bitSBUF = (tByte) SLAVE_ID;  
// Wait while data are sent
// (watchdog will trap UART failure...)while (TI ==0)
// Now clear Tx enable pin
RS485_Tx_Enable = 0;}
else
{Count = 0;}
} while (Count < 2);
// Start the schedulerEA = 1;}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 668www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 694 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCU_B_SLAVE_Init().
This Slave is triggered by USART interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_UART_Rx_Tx  
{tByte Index;
if (RI == 1) // Must check this. 
{// DefaultNetwork_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Two-byte messages are sent (Ack) and received (Tick)
// - it takes two sched ticks to process each message//// Keep track of the current byteif (Message_byte_G == 0)
{Message_byte_G = 1;}
else
{Message_byte_G = 0;}
// Check tick data - send ack if necessary
// NOTE: 'START' message will only be sent after a 'time out'if (SCU_B_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message() == SLAVE_ID)
{SCU_B_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();
// Feed the watchdog ONLY when a *relevant* message is
// received// (noise on the bus, etc, will not stop the watchdog...)//// START messages will NOT refresh the slave// - Must talk to every slave at regular intervals SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 669www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 695 ---
// Check if there is a task at this location
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe = 1;  // Set the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay =SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
RI = 0;  // Reset the RI flag   }
else
{
// ISR call was triggered by TI flag, after last character was sent
// RS485_Tx_Enable flag is reset here RS485_Tx_Enable = 0;
// Must clear the TI flag
TI = 0;}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master()Slave must send and 'Acknowledge' message to the master, after
tick messages are received. NOTE: Only tick messages specificallyaddressed to this slave should be acknowledged.
The acknowledge message serves two purposes:
[1] It confirms to the master that this slave is alive & well.[2] It provides a means of sending data to the master and - hence
- to other slaves.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 670www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 696 ---
NOTE: Direct data transfer between slaves is NOT possible.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void)
{// Enable the slave RS-485 hardware (Tx)// NOTE: This flag will be reset in the 'Update' ISRRS485_Tx_Enable = 1;
// Sending one byte of data at a time, depending on index value
// If Message_byte_G is 0, send first byte (the slave ID)if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{TI = 0;                                            TB8 = 1;  // Set ‘Command’ bitSBUF = SLAVE_ID;}
else
{// Message_byte_G is 1, send the data byte TI = 0;TB8 = 0;SBUF = Ack_message_data_G;}
// Data sent - return    
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message()The tick messages are crucial to the operation of this shared-clock
scheduler: the arrival of a tick message (at regular intervals) invokes the 'Update' ISR, that drives the scheduler.
The tick messages themselves may contain data.  These data are 
extracted in this function. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCU_B_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void)
{tByte Data;
// Try to get data byte
if (RI == 0)
{// No data - something is wrongSCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 671www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 697 ---
// Set the error flag bit
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// Return slave ID 0
return 0x00;} 
// There *ARE* data available
Data = (tByte) SBUF;RI = 0;  // Clear RI flag
// What we do with this message depends if it a first or second byte
if (Message_byte_G == 0)
{// This is (should be) an ID byteMessage_ID_G = Data;   
if (RB8 == 0)
{Message_ID_G = 0;  // Command bit should be set}
}
else
{// This is (should be) a data byte// - Command bit should not be setif ((Message_ID_G == SLAVE_ID) && (RB8 == 0))
{Tick_message_data_G = Data;}
else
{// Something is wrong - set Message_ID to 0Message_ID = 0; 
// Set the error flag bit
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;}
}
return Message_ID_G;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()
This function sets up the watchdog timer.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 672www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 698 ---
If the Master fails (or other error develops), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the slave. This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state. The slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances. The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// INIT NOT REQUIRED FOR 1232 EXTERNAL WATCHDOG// - May be required with different watchdog hardware//// Edit as required}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()Feed the external (1232) watchdog.Timeout is between ~60 and 250 ms (hardware dependent)Assumes external 1232 watchdog
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{// Change the state of the watchdog pinif (WATCHDOG_state_G == 1)
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 0;WATCHDOG_pin = 0;}
else
{WATCHDOG_state_G = 1;WATCHDOG_pin = 1;} 
}    SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 673www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 699 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCU_B_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails, and no working backup is available(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCU_B_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as requiredTRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 27.4 Part of the software for shared-clock (UART) scheduler demonstration
system (Slave node)
[Note:Network supports Max489 transceivers, and uses the RS-485 protocol.]
Further reading
Axelson, J. (1998) Serial Port Complete , Lakeview Research.
Goldie, J. (1991) ‘Comparing EIA-485 and EIA-422-A line drivers and receivers in
multipoint applications’, National Semiconductor Application Note 759. [Availablefrom www.national.com ]
Goldie, J. (1996) ‘Ten ways to bulletproof RS-485 interfaces’, National Semiconductor
Application Note 1057. [Available from www.national.com ]
Nelson, T. (1995) ‘The practical limits of RS-485’, National Semiconductor Application
Note 979. [Available from www.national.com ]
Sivasothy, S. (1998) ‘Transceivers and repeaters meeting the EIA RS-485 interface
standard’, National Semiconductor Application Note 409. [Available fromwww.national.com ]MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 674www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 700 ---
Shared-clock schedulers using CAN
Introduction
In the previous chapter we introduced methods, based on ‘RS-232’ and ‘RS-485’ com-
munication protocols, to allow us to extend the co-operative scheduler discussed inPart C for use in a distributed, multiprocessor environment.
One key advantage of using such environments is that the essential (UART) hard-
ware is available in all members of the 8051 family, as well as the great majority ofother microcontroller devices (8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit or greater). As a result, creatingpoint-to-point and multiprocessor distributed (and local) systems in this way is a cost-effective solution that may be widely applied.
However, UART-based communication protocols suffer from two significant weak-
nesses in a shared-clock environment:
The UART supports byte-based communications only: data transfer between
Master and Slaves (and vice versa) is limited to 0.5 bytes per clock tick.
The hardware has a very limited ability to detect errors: most error detection /
correction must be carried out in software. 
In the late 1970s the automotive industry began to tackle very similar problems.
The motivation was largely that the wiring looms in passenger cars were becominglarger, heavier and more expensive. The industry was looking for a form of cheap,multi-drop serial bus to which numerous different system components could be con-nected (see Lawrenz, 1997, for further details). 
From this need arose the ‘controller area network’ (CAN). CAN is now becoming
commonplace in vehicles produced by most major automotive manufacturers. It isalso widely used in process control and other industrial areas. chapter 28www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 701 ---
We can summarize some of the features of CAN as follows:
CAN is message based and messages can be up to eight bytes in length. Used
in a shared-clock scheduler, the data transfer between Master and Slaves(and vice versa) is up to seven bytes per clock tick. This is adequate formost applications.
A number of 8051 devices have on-chip support for CAN, allowing the proto-col to be used with minimal overheads.
The hardware has advanced error-detection (and correction) facilities built
in, further reducing the software load.
CAN may be used for both ‘local’ and ‘distributed’ systems. 
In this chapter, we will consider how we can use the CAN bus as an efficient means
of creating reliable, shared-clock, multiprocessor systems.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 676www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 702 ---
SCC SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a scheduler.
Problem
How do you schedule tasks on (and transfer data over) a network of two (or more)8051 microcontrollers communicating using the CAN protocol?
Background
We consider some relevant background material in this section
What is a shared-clock scheduler?
See Chapter 25 for general background material on shared-clock schedulers.
What is CAN?
We begin our discussion of the controller area network (CAN) protocol by highlight-ing some important features of this standard:
GCAN supports high-speed (1 Mbits/s) data transmission over short distances (40 m)and low-speed (5 kbits/s) transmissions at lengths of up to 10,000 m.
GCAN is message based. The data in each message may vary in length between 0 andeight bytes. This data length is ideal for many embedded applications.
GThe receipt of a message can be used to generate an interrupt. The interrupt will begenerated only when a complete message (up to eight bytes of data) has beenreceived: this is unlike a UART (for example) which will respond to every character. 
GCAN is a shared broadcast bus: all messages are sent to all nodes. However, eachmessage has an identifier: this can be used to ‘filter’ messages. This means that – byusing a ‘Full CAN’ controller (see later) – we can ensure that a particular node willonly respond to ‘relevant’ messages: that is, messages with a particular ID. 
This is very powerful. What it means in practice is, for example, that a Slave
node can be set to ignore all messages directed from a different Slave to the Master.
GCAN is usually implemented on a simple, low-cost, two-wire differential serial bussystem. Other physical media may be used, such as fibre optics (but this is compar-atively rare).SCC SCHEDULER 677www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 703 ---
G The maximum number of nodes on a CAN bus is 32. 
GMessages can be given an individual priority. This means, for example, that ‘Tick
messages’ can be given a higher priority than ‘Acknowledge messages’.
GCAN is highly fault tolerant, with powerful error-detection and handling mecha-nisms built into the controller. 
GLast, but not least, microcontrollers with built-in CAN controllers are available froma range of companies. For example, 8051 devices with CAN controllers are availablefrom Infineon (c505c, c515c), Philips (8xC592, 8xC598) and Dallas (80C390).
Overall, as we will see in the course of this chapter, the CAN bus provides an excel-
lent foundation for reliable distributed scheduled applications.
We now consider some of the important features of CAN in more detail.
CAN 1.0 vs. CAN 2.0
The CAN protocol comes in two versions: CAN 1.0 and CAN 2.0.  CAN 2.0 is back-wardly compatible with CAN 1.0 and most new controllers are CAN 2.0. 
In addition, there are two parts to the CAN 2.0 standard: Part A and Part B. With
CAN 1.0 and CAN 2.0A, identifiers must be 11 bits long. With CAN 2.0B identifierscan be 11 bits (a ‘standard’ identifier) or 29 bits (an ‘extended’ identifier). 
The following basic compatibility rules apply:
GCAN 2.0B active controllers are able to send and receive both standard and
extended messages. 
G CAN 2.0B passive controllers are able to send and receive standard messages. In
addition, they will discard (and ignore) extended frames. They will not generate anerror when they ‘see’ extended messages.
G CAN 1.0 controllers generate bus errors when they see extended frames: theycannot be used on networks where extended identifiers are used.
Basic CAN vs. Full CAN
There are two main classes of CAN controller available. Note that these classes are notcovered by the standard, so there is some variation. As noted already, the difference isthat Full CAN controllers provide an acceptance filter that allows a node to ignoreirrelevant messages.
Which microcontrollers have support for CAN?
At the time of writing, the following 8051 devices provide on-chip CAN support:
GDallas 80c390. Two on-chip CAN modules, each supporting CAN 2.0B.
GInfineon C505C. Supports CAN2.0B.
GInfineon C515C. Supports CAN2.0B.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 678www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 704 ---
GPhilips 8xC591. Supports CAN2.0B.
GPhilips 8x592. Supports CAN2.0A.
GPhilips 8x598. Supports CAN2.0A.
GTemic T89C51CC01. Supports CAN2.0B.
What about CAN without on-chip hardware support?
Using a microcontroller with on-chip CAN support is, in most circumstances, likely to
be easier, more reliable and more cost-effective. If you are unable to use a microcon-troller with such support and need to use CAN, then you will require an external CANcontroller chip. Here we will briefly mention two options.
Scott (1995) discusses in detail how to connect an Intel 82527 CAN controller chip
to an 8051-family microcontroller.
Hank and Jöhnk (1997) discuss in detail how to connect a Philips SJA1000 CAN
controller to various microcontrollers.
Solution
We consider how a CAN-based, shared-clock scheduler can be designed in this sec-tion. 
The basis of the approach
All the shared-clock schedulers we discuss in this book have the same underlyingarchitecture (Figure 28.1).
Here we have one, accurate clock on the Master node in the network. This clock
is used to drive the scheduler in the Master node in exactly the manner discussed inPart C. SCC SCHEDULER 679
FIGURE  28.1 The architecture of all the shared-clock schedulers discussed in this bookMaster Slave 1 Slave 2 Slave N
Tick messages (from Master to Slaves)Acknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
messageAcknowledgement
messagewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 705 ---
The Slave nodes also have schedulers: however, the interrupts used to drive these
schedulers are derived from ‘tick messages’ generated by the Master. Thus, in theCAN-based network we are concerned with in this pattern, the Slave node(s) will havea S-C scheduler driven by the ‘receive’ interrupts generated through the receipt of abyte of data sent by the Master.
Note that the ability to generate an interrupt (in a Slave) on receipt of a data byte
by the CAN module makes the underlying scheduler operation an extremely simpletwo-stage process:
1Timer overflow in the Master causes the scheduler ‘Update’ function to beinvoked. This, in turn, causes a byte of data to be sent (via the CAN bus) toall Slaves:
void MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{
...MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(...);...}
2When these data have been received all Slaves generate an interrupt; this invokes
the ‘Update’ function in the Slave schedulers. This, in turn, causes one Slave tosend an ‘Acknowledge’ message back to the Master (again via the CAN bus).
void SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_CAN  
{
...SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();...}
The message structure
As we saw in SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )[page 609] the design of the message structure
to be used in a UART-based network requires some care, since the data bandwidth isvery limited (eight bits per tick). A key advantage of the CAN bus is that it supportsmessages with a size of up to eight-bytes. This makes the design of the message struc-ture much more straightforward.
Here we adopt the following solution:
G Up to 31 Slave nodes (and one Master node) may be used in a CAN network. EachSlave is given a unique ID (0x01 to 0xFF). MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 680www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 706 ---
G Each tick message from the Master is between one and eight bytes long; all the bytes
are sent in a single tick interval . In all messages, the first byte is the ID of the Slave to
which the message is addressed; the remaining bytes (if any) are the message data.
GAll Slaves generate interrupts in response to every tick message (whether or not they
are the addressee of the message).
G Only the Slave to which a tick message is addressed will reply to the Master; thisreply takes the form of an acknowledge message.
G Each acknowledge message from a Slave is between one and eight bytes long; all ofthe bytes are sent in the same tick interval in which the tick message is received.The first byte of the acknowledge message is the ID of the Slave from which themessage was sent; the remaining bytes (if any) are the message data (Figure 28.2).
Determining the required baud rate
The timing of timer ticks in the Master is set to a duration such that a tick messagecan be sent and an acknowledge message received between ticks. Clearly, this dura-tion depends on the network baud rate. 
Determining the required baud rate for a CAN bus is more involved, because the
message structure is more complex (Table 28.1).
We require two messages per tick: with 1 ms ticks, we require at least 308,000 baud:
allowing 350,000 baud gives a good margin for error. This is achievable with CAN, atdistances up to around 100 metres. Should you require larger distances, the tick inter-val must either be lengthened or repeater nodes should be added in the network at100-metre intervals.
Note also that, as with any shared-clock network, there is a delay between the
timer on the Master and the UART-based interrupt on the Slave (Figure 28.3). Thisdelay arises because the Slave interrupt is generated at the end of the tick message. Inthe absence of network errors, this delay is fixed and derives largely from the timetaken to transmit a message via the CAN bus; that is, it varies with the baud rate. Asdiscussed earlier, a baud rate of at least 350,000 bits/second is appropriate for a1 ms sheduler; this gives a tick latency (assuming 154 bits / message: see Table 28.1)of approximately 0.5 ms.SCC SCHEDULER 681
FIGURE  28.2 The communication between the Master and (two) Slave nodes in a CAN-based S-C
networkTick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)Tick
message
(Data for S2)Ack
message
(from S2)Tick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)Slave tick (from CAN hardware)
Master tick (from timer)Timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 707 ---
MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 682
TABLE 28.1 The structure of a CAN message
Description Size (bits)
Data 64 
Start bit 1
Identifier bits 11
SRR bit 1
IDE bit 1
Identifier bits 18
RTR bit 1
Control bits 6
CRC bits 15
Stuff bits (maximum) 23
CRC delimiter 1
ACK slot 1
ACK delimiter 1
EOF bits 7
IFS bits 3
Total 154 bits / message
[Note: this is a worst-case message duration and includes 8 bytes of data.]FIGURE  28.3 The latency between tick generation on the Master and on the SlaveTick
message
(Data for S1)Ack
message
(from S1)
TimeTick latency(varies with baud rate)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 708 ---
As before, note that this latency is fixed and can be accurately predicted on paper
and then confirmed through simulation and testing. If precise synchronization ofMaster and Slave processing is required, note that:
GAll the Slaves are – within the limits of measurement – precisely in step.
GTo bring the Master in step with the Slaves, it is necessary only to add a short delayin the Master ‘Update’ function.
Transceivers for distributed networks
Although several CAN transceivers are available, the Philips8PCA82c250 remains the
most widely used. This may be easily connected to any of the CAN-based 8051devices, using a circuit similar to that shown in Figure 28.4.
Note that a range of different connections are possible; for example greater isola-
tion of the microcontroller from damage to the CAN network can be achievedthrough the use of opto-couplers between the transceiver and the microcontroller:refer to the Philips PCA82c250 data sheet for further details.SCC SCHEDULER 683
FIGURE  28.4 Connecting a CAN transceiver (Philips PCA82C250) to a CAN-based microcontroller
(reproduced, courtesy of Philips Semiconductors)P8xC592/P8xCE598
CAN-CONTROLLER
CTX0 CRX0 CRX1 PX,Y
Rext
PCA82C250T
CAN-TRANSCEIVERTXD RXD VrefRs
VCC
CANH CANLVCC100 nF
124ΩCAN BUS
LINE+5 V
124Ω
8.www.philips.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 709 ---
Node wiring for distributed networks
The CAN standard does not dictate that a particular wiring scheme is used. However,
the most common means of linking together CAN nodes is through the use of a two-wire, twisted pair arrangement: this is very similar to a single channel of the RS-485wiring arrangement we discussed in 
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) [page 648]. 
In the CAN bus, the two signal lines are termed ‘CAN High’ and ‘CAN Low’. In the
quiescent state, both lines sit at 2.5V. A ‘1’ is transmitted by raising the voltage of theHigh line above that of Low line: this is termed a ‘dominant’ bit. A ‘0’ is representedby raising the voltage of the Low line above that of the High line: this is termed a‘recessive’ bit. 
Using twisted-pair wiring, the differential CAN inputs successfully cancel out noise.
In addition, the CAN networks connected in this way continue to function evenwhen one of the lines is severed. 
Note that, as with the RS-485 cabling, a 120 Ωterminating resistor is connected at
each end of the bus (Figure 28.5).
Hardware and wiring for local networks
Use of a ‘local’ CAN network does not require the use of transceiver chips. For earlyprototypes, connecting together the Tx and Rx lines from a number of CAN-basedmicrocontrollers will allow you to link the devices (that is, connect all the Tx linestogether, and – separately – collect all the Rx lines together). No terminating resistorswill be required.
A better solution (proposed by Barrenscheen, 1996) is based on a wired-OR struc-
ture (see Figure 28.6). Here all Tx lines are connected to a single data line via fastdiodes (in order to avoid short circuits at the output pins). The Rx inputs are directlyconnected to this single data line, which is pulled to +5V by a pull-up resistor (to gen-erate the required passive ‘1’-level). The maximum wire length is limited toapproximately one metre.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 684
FIGURE  28.5 Connecting three nodes (with transceivers) to a twisted-pair CAN bus120Ω 120Ω
Node 1 Node 2 Node 3CAN high
CAN lowwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 710 ---
Software for the shared-clock CAN scheduler
As you would expect, the software required to create the shared-clock CAN scheduler
is very similar in structure to the code presented in the previous two chapters. (Referto the code listings that follow for detailed implementation details.)
One important difference between the scheduler presented here and those dis-
cussed in previous chapters is the mechanism of error handling used here. As wediscussed in Chapter 25 (page 549), three different error-handling techniques for S-Cschedulers are presented in this book. Here we use technique three. This operates asfollows. If a Slave fails, then – rather than restarting the whole network – we attemptto start the corresponding backup unit. 
The strengths and weaknesses of this approach are as follows:
It allows full use to be made of backup nodes.
In most circumstances it takes comparatively little time to engage the
backup unit.
The underlying coding is more complicated than the other alternatives discussed
in this book.
Note that if the network fails to start the backup unit successfully, one of the other
recovery strategies introduced in Chapter 25 may be attempted.
Hardware resource implications
Use of CAN will be most cost-effective using a controller with built-in CAN support.
Note that some controllers are available with dual CAN connections. 
Reliability and safety implications
Refer to page 550 for a discussion of the reasons why use of multiple microcontrollersmay decrease the system reliability.
Nonetheless, CAN is highly fault tolerant, with powerful error-detection and han-
dling mechanisms built into the controller: some of these facilities are demonstratedin the sample code that follow.SCC SCHEDULER 685
FIGURE  28.6 Connecting together CAN-based microcontrollers without the use of transceivers
(adapted from Barrenscheen, 1996)CAN
node A
RxDC TxDCCAN
node B
RxDC TxDCCAN
node C
RxDC TxDC
3k3 +5Vwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 711 ---
Portability
As relatively few 8051 microcontrollers have built-in CAN support, this pattern is less
easy to port than some of the other patterns presented in this book.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
CAN is message based and messages can be up to eight bytes in length. Usedin a shared-clock scheduler, the data transfer between Master and Slaves (andvice versa) is up to seven bytes per clock tick. This is more than adequate forthe great majority of applications.
A number of 8051 devices have on-chip support for CAN, allowing the proto-
col to be used with minimal overheads.
The hardware has advanced error-detection (and correction) facilities built
in, further reducing the software load
CAN may be used for both ‘local’ and ‘distributed’ systems. 8051 devices with CAN support tend to be more expensive than ‘Standard’ 8051s.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The nearest alternative discussed in this book is SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) [page 646].
Example: Creating a CAN-based scheduler using the
Infineon C515c
This example illustrates the use of the Infineon c515C microcontroller. This popular
device has on-chip CAN hardware (Listings 28.1 and 28.2).
The code may be used in either a distributed or local network, with the hardware
discussed earlier.
Master software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_M515.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A SHARED-CLOCK (CAN) SCHEDULER (MASTER) ***
*** FOR 80C515C (etc.) ***
*** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ****** This version assumes 10 MHz crystal on 515c ***
*** 6 ms (precise) tick interval ****** Both Master and Slave(s) share the same tick rate ***MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 686www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 712 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Delay_T0.h"
#include "TLight_B.h"#include "SCC_M515.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Four bytes of data (plus ID information) are sent 
tByte Tick_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES][4] = {'M'};  tByte Ack_message_data_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES][4];
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private variable definitions -----------------------------static tByte Slave_index_G = 0;
static bit First_ack_G = 1;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCC_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte);
static bit  SCC_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte);
static void SCC_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network(void);static void SCC_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void);static void SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
static tByte  SCC_A_MASTER_Start_Slave(const tByte)  reentrant;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Do not use ID 0x00 (used to start slaves)
static const tByte MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x01};static const tByte BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0x02};
// Number of ticks between reset attempts
#define SLAVE_RESET_INTERVAL 0U
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) SCC SCHEDULER 687www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 713 ---
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------
static tWord Slave_reset_attempts_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES];
// Slave IDs may be any non-zero tByte value (but all must be different)
static tByte Current_Slave_IDs_G[NUMBER_OF_SLAVES] = {0};
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Init_T2_CAN()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler data 
structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Init_T2_CAN(void) 
{tByte i;tByte Message;tByte Slave_index;
// No interrupts (yet)
EA = 0;
// Start the watchdog
SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init();
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;// ------ Set up the scheduler ----------------------------------
// Sort out the tasksfor (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// We allow any combination of ID numbers in slaves
for (Slave_index = 0; Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES; Slave_index++)
{Slave_reset_attempts_G[Slave_index] = 0;Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] = MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 688www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 714 ---
}
// Get ready to send first tick message
First_ack_G = 1;Slave_index_G = 0;
// ------ Set up the CAN link (begin) ------------------------// ---------------- SYSCON Register --------------
// The access to XRAM and CAN controller is enabled.// The signals !RD and !WR are not activated during accesses// to the XRAM/CAN controller.// ALE generation is enabled.SYSCON = 0x20;  
//  ------------ CAN Control/Status Register --------------
//  Start to init the CAN moduleCAN_cr  = 0x41;  // INIT and CCE
//  ------------ Bit Timing Register ---------------------
// Baudrate = 333.333 kbaud // - Need 308+ kbaud plus for 1 ms ticks, 8 data bytes// - See text for details  //// There are 5 time quanta before sample point// There are 4 time quanta after sample point// The (re)synchronization jump width is 2 time quantaCAN_btr1  = 0x34;      // Bit Timing RegisterCAN_btr0  = 0x42; 
CAN_gms1  = 0xFF;  // Global Mask Short Register 1
CAN_gms0  = 0xFF;  // Global Mask Short Register 0
CAN_ugml1 = 0xFF;  // Upper Global Mask Long Register 1
CAN_ugml0 = 0xFF;  // Upper Global Mask Long Register 0
CAN_lgml1 = 0xF8;  // Lower Global Mask Long Register 1
CAN_lgml0 = 0xFF;  // Lower Global Mask Long Register 0
// --- Configure the 'Tick' Message Object ---
// 'Message Object 1' is validCAN_messages[0].MCR1  = 0x55;    // Message Control Register 1CAN_messages[0].MCR0  = 0x95;    // Message Control Register 0
// Message direction is transmit
// Extended 29-bit identifier // These have ID 0x000000 and 5 valid data bytesSCC SCHEDULER 689www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 715 ---
CAN_messages[0].MCFG = 0x5C;      // Message Configuration Register
CAN_messages[0].UAR1  = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 1
CAN_messages[0].UAR0  = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 0CAN_messages[0].LAR1  = 0x00;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 1CAN_messages[0].LAR0  = 0x00;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 0
CAN_messages[0].Data[0] = 0x00;   // data byte 0
CAN_messages[0].Data[1] = 0x00;   // data byte 1CAN_messages[0].Data[2] = 0x00;   // data byte 2CAN_messages[0].Data[3] = 0x00;   // data byte 3CAN_messages[0].Data[4] = 0x00;   // data byte 4
// --- Configure the 'Ack' Message Object ---// 'Message Object 2' is valid
// NOTE: Object 2 receives *ALL* ack messagesCAN_messages[1].MCR1  = 0x55;    // Message Control Register 1CAN_messages[1].MCR0  = 0x95;    // Message Control Register 0
// Message direction is receive
// Extended 29-bit identifier// These all have ID: 0x000000FF (5 valid data bytes)CAN_messages[1].MCFG = 0x04;      // Message Configuration Register
CAN_messages[1].UAR1  = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 1
CAN_messages[1].UAR0  = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 0CAN_messages[1].LAR1  = 0xF8;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 1CAN_messages[1].LAR0  = 0x07;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 0
// Configure remaining message objects - none are valid
for (Message = 2; Message <= 14; ++Message)
{                                 CAN_messages[Message].MCR1  = 0x55;  // Message Control Register 1CAN_messages[Message].MCR0  = 0x55;  // Message Control Register 0}
// ------------ CAN Control Register ---------------------
//  reset CCE and INITCAN_cr = 0x00;
// ------ Set up the CAN link (end) --------------------------// ------ Set up Timer 2 (begin) --------------------------------
// 80c515c, 10 MHz// Timer 2 is set to overflow every 6 ms - see text// Mode 1 = Timerfunction
// Prescaler: Fcpu/12MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 690www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 716 ---
T2PS = 1;
// Mode 0 = auto-reload upon timer overflow
// Preset the timer register with autoreload value// NOTE: Timing is same as standard (8052) T2 timing// - if T2PS = 1 (otherwise twice as fast as 8052)TL2 = 0x78;TH2 = 0xEC;
//  Mode 0 for all channels
T2CON |= 0x11;
//  timer 2 overflow interrupt is enabled
ET2 = 1;//  timer 2 external reload interrupt is disabledEXEN2 = 0;
// Compare/capture Channel 0 
// Disabled// Compare Register CRC on: 0x0000;CRCL = 0x78;CRCH = 0xEC;
//  CC0/ext3 interrupt is disabled
EX3 = 0;
// Compare/capture Channel 1-3 
// DisabledCCL1 = 0x00;CCH1 = 0x00;CCL2 = 0x00;CCH2 = 0x00;CCL3 = 0x00;CCH3 = 0x00;
// Interrupts Channel 1-3 
// DisabledEX4 = 0;EX5 = 0;EX6 = 0;
// all above mentioned modes for Channel 0 to Channel 3 
CCEN = 0x00;// ------ Set up Timer 2 (end) ----------------------------------}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-SCC SCHEDULER 691www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 717 ---
SCC_A_MASTER_Start()
Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Start(void) 
{tByte Num_active_slaves;tByte i;bit Slave_replied_correctly;tByte Slave_index, Slave_ID;
// Refresh the watchdog
SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Place system in 'safe state'
SCC_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State();
// Report error as we wait to start
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_SLAVE_TO_ACK;
SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Pause here (300 ms), to timeout all the slaves
// (This is the means by which we synchronize the network)for (i = 0; i < 10; i++)
{Hardware_Delay_T0(30);SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}     
// Currently disconnected from all slaves
Num_active_slaves = 0;
// After the initial (long) delay, all (operational) slaves will
// have timed out.// All operational slaves will now be in the 'READY TO START' state// Send them a 'slave id' message to get them startedSlave_index = 0;do {
// Refresh the watchdogSCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 692www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 718 ---
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index]; 
Slave_replied_correctly = SCC_A_MASTER_Start_Slave(Slave_ID);if (Slave_replied_correctly)
{Num_active_slaves++;Slave_index++;}
else
{// Slave did not reply correctly // - try to switch to backup device (if available)if (Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] !=BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index])
{
// There is a backup available: switch to backup and try again
Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index] =BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index];}
else
{// No backup available (or backup failed too) - have to// continueSlave_index++;}
}
} while (Slave_index < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES);
// DEAL WITH CASE OF MISSING SLAVE(S) HERE ...
if (Num_active_slaves < NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{// User-defined error handling here...// 1 or more slaves have not replied// NOTE: In some circumstances you may wish to abort if slaves// are missing// - or reconfigure the network.
// Simplest solution is to display an error and carry on
// (this is what we do here)      Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_ONE_OR_MORE_SLAVES_DID_NOT_START;Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;}SCC SCHEDULER 693www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 719 ---
else
{Error_code_G = 0;Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;}
// Start the scheduler
IRCON = 0;EA = 1;   }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Update_T2
This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate determined by 
the timer settings in SCC_A_MASTER_Init_T2().  This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts: timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Update_T2(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;tByte Previous_slave_index;bit Slave_replied_correctly;
TF2 = 0;  // Must clear this. // Refresh the watchdog
SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();
// Default
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Keep track of the current slave
Previous_slave_index = Slave_index_G;   // First value of prev slave
// is 0...
if (++Slave_index_G >= NUMBER_OF_SLAVES)
{Slave_index_G = 0;}    
// Check that the appropriate slave responded to the previous message:
// (if it did, store the data sent by this slave)if (SCC_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(Previous_slave_index) == RETURN_ERROR)
{Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_LOST_SLAVE;Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 694www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 720 ---
// If we have lost contact with a slave, we attempt to
// switch to a backup device (if one is available)if (Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index_G] !=BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index_G])
{// There is a backup available: switch to backup and try againCurrent_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index_G] =BACKUP_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index_G];}
else
{// There is no backup available (or we are already using it) // Try main device.Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index_G] =MAIN_SLAVE_IDs[Slave_index_G];}
// Try to connect to the slave
Slave_replied_correctly =SCC_A_MASTER_Start_Slave(Current_Slave_IDs_G[Slave_index_G]);
if (!Slave_replied_correctly)
{// No backup available (or backup failed too) - we shut down// OTHER BEHAVIOUR MAY BE MORE APPROPRIATE IN YOUR APPLICATIONSCC_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network();}
}
// Send 'tick' message to all connected slaves
// (sends one data byte to the current slave)SCC_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(Slave_index_G);
// Check the last error codes on the CAN bus via the status register
if ((CAN_sr & 0x07) != 0)
{Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CAN_BUS_ERROR;Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// See Infineon c515c manual for error code details
CAN_error_pin0 = ((CAN_sr & 0x01) == 0);CAN_error_pin1 = ((CAN_sr & 0x02) == 0);CAN_error_pin2 = ((CAN_sr & 0x04) == 0);}
elseSCC SCHEDULER 695www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 721 ---
{
CAN_error_pin0 = 1;CAN_error_pin1 = 1;CAN_error_pin2 = 1;}
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Incr. the 'Run Me' flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message()This function sends a tick message, over the CAN network.
The receipt of this message will cause an interrupt to be generatedin the slave(s): this invoke the scheduler 'update' functionin the slave(s).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Send_Tick_Message(const tByte SLAVE_INDEX) 
{// Find the slave ID for this slave // ALL SLAVES MUST HAVE A UNIQUE (non-zero) IDMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 696www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 722 ---
tByte Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[SLAVE_INDEX];
CAN_messages[0].Data[0] = Slave_ID;   
// Fill the data fields 
CAN_messages[0].Data[1] = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][0];   CAN_messages[0].Data[2] = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][1];   CAN_messages[0].Data[3] = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][2];   CAN_messages[0].Data[4] = Tick_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][3];   
// Send the message on the CAN bus
CAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xE7;  // TXRQ, reset CPUUPD}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Process_Ack()
Make sure the slave (SLAVE_ID) has acknowledged the previous
message that was sent.  If it has, extract the message datafrom the USART hardware: if not, call the appropriate errorhandler.
PARAMS:   The index of the slave. RETURNS:  RETURN_NORMAL - Ack received (data in Ack_message_data_G)
RETURN_ERROR  - No ack received (-> no data)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/bit SCC_A_MASTER_Process_Ack(const tByte SLAVE_INDEX) 
{tByte Ack_ID, Slave_ID;
// First time this is called there is no ack tick to check 
// - we simply return 'OK'if (First_ack_G)
{First_ack_G = 0;return RETURN_NORMAL;}
if ((CAN_messages[1].MCR1 & 0x03) == 0x02)    // if NEWDAT
{// An ack message was received//// Extract the dataAck_ID = CAN_messages[1].Data[0];   // Get data byte 0
Ack_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][0] = CAN_messages[1].Data[1];   
Ack_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][1] = CAN_messages[1].Data[2];   SCC SCHEDULER 697www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 723 ---
Ack_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][2] = CAN_messages[1].Data[3];   
Ack_message_data_G[SLAVE_INDEX][3] = CAN_messages[1].Data[4];   
CAN_messages[1].MCR0 = 0xfd;  // reset NEWDAT, INTPND
CAN_messages[1].MCR1 = 0xfd;
// Find the slave ID for this slave 
Slave_ID = (tByte) Current_Slave_IDs_G[SLAVE_INDEX];
if (Ack_ID == Slave_ID)
{return RETURN_NORMAL;}
}
// No message, or ID incorrect
return RETURN_ERROR;  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network()This function will be called when a slave fails to 
acknowledge a tick message.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Shut_Down_the_Network(void)
{EA = 0;
while(1)
{SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh();}  
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State()
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node cannot detect a slave(3) The network has an error
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 698www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 724 ---
void SCC_A_MASTER_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED - Edit as required
TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init()
This function sets up the watchdog timer.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// Watchdog timer prescaler (1/16) enabled // Watchdog timer reload value is 0x6B// Oscillator is 10 MHz -> watchdog period is ~103 msWDTREL = 0xEB;
// Start watchdog timer
WDT  = 1;SWDT = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh()Feed the internal c515c watchdog.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_MASTER_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{WDT = 1; SWDT = 1;}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_MASTER_Start_Slave()Try to connect to a slave device.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCC_A_MASTER_Start_Slave(const tByte SLAVE_ID) reentrant
{tByte Slave_replied_correctly = 0;
//   tByte Slave_ID;
tByte Ack_ID, Ack_00;SCC SCHEDULER 699www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 725 ---
// Send a 'Slave ID' message
CAN_messages[0].Data[0] = 0x00;  // Not a valid slave ID    CAN_messages[0].Data[1] = SLAVE_ID;    CAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xE7;  // Send it
// Wait to give slave time to reply
Hardware_Delay_T0(5);   
// Check we had a reply
if ((CAN_messages[1].MCR1 & 0x03) == 0x02)    // if NEWDAT
{// An ack message was received - extract the dataAck_00 = (tByte) CAN_messages[1].Data[0];  // Get data byte 0Ack_ID = (tByte) CAN_messages[1].Data[1];  // Get data byte 1
CAN_messages[1].MCR0 = 0xfd;  // reset NEWDAT, INTPND
CAN_messages[1].MCR1 = 0xfd;
if ((Ack_00 == 0x00) && (Ack_ID == SLAVE_ID)) 
{Slave_replied_correctly = 1;}
}
return Slave_replied_correctly;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 28.1 Part of the software for a shared-clock CAN scheduler (Master node)
Slave software
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_S515.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS IS A SHARED-SCHEDULER [CAN BASED] FOR 80C515C (etc.) *** Both Master and Slave share the same tick rate ***
*** - See Master code for details ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 700www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 726 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SCC_S515.h"
#include "TLight_B.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Data sent from the master to this slave
tByte Tick_message_data_G[4];
// Data sent from this slave to the master 
// - data may be sent on, by the master, to another slave  tByte Ack_message_data_G[4]; 
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.c)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable (see Sch51.c)
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------
static void  SCC_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void);
static void  SCC_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void);
static tByte SCC_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void);
static bit   SCC_A_SLAVE_Read_Command_Bit(const tByte);
static tByte SCC_A_SLAVE_Set_Command_Bit(const tByte);static tByte SCC_A_SLAVE_Read_Message_ID(const tByte);
static void  SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void);
static void  SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
// Each slave (and backup) must have a unique (non-zero) ID 
#define SLAVE_ID 0x01
#define NO_NETWORK_ERROR (1) 
#define NETWORK_ERROR (0)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Init_CAN()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  SCC SCHEDULER 701www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 727 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Init_CAN(void) 
{tByte i;tByte Message;
// Sort out the tasks
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;
// Set the network error pin (reset when tick message received)
Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// ------ SYSCON Register 
// The access to XRAM and CAN controller is enabled.// The signals !RD and !WR are not activated during accesses// to the XRAM/CAN controller.// ALE generation is enabled.SYSCON = 0x20;  
//  ------------ CAN Control/Status Register --------------
//  Start to init the CAN moduleCAN_cr  = 0x41;  // INIT and CCE
//  ------------ Bit Timing Register ---------------------
// Baudrate = 333.333 kbaud // - Need 308+ kbaud plus for 1 ms ticks, 8 data bytes// - See text for details  //// There are 5 time quanta before sample point// There are 4 time quanta after sample point// The (re)synchronization jump width is 2 time quantaCAN_btr1  = 0x34;  // Bit Timing RegisterCAN_btr0  = 0x42; 
CAN_gms1  = 0xFF;  // Global Mask Short Register 1
CAN_gms0  = 0xFF;  // Global Mask Short Register 0
CAN_ugml1 = 0xFF;  // Upper Global Mask Long Register 1
CAN_ugml0 = 0xFF;  // Upper Global Mask Long Register 0MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 702www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 728 ---
CAN_lgml1 = 0xF8;  // Lower Global Mask Long Register 1
CAN_lgml0 = 0xFF;  // Lower Global Mask Long Register 0
//  ------ Configure 'Tick' Message Object 
//  Message object 1 is valid//  enable receive interruptCAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0x55;    // Message Ctrl. Reg. 1CAN_messages[0].MCR0 = 0x99;    // Message Ctrl. Reg. 0
//  Message direction is receive
//  extended 29-bit identifierCAN_messages[0].MCFG = 0x04;    // Message Config. Reg.
CAN_messages[0].UAR1 = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 1
CAN_messages[0].UAR0 = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 0CAN_messages[0].LAR1 = 0x00;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 1CAN_messages[0].LAR0 = 0x00;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 0
//  ------ Configure 'Ack' Message Object 
CAN_messages[1].MCR1 = 0x55;    // Message Ctrl. Reg. 1CAN_messages[1].MCR0 = 0x95;    // Message Ctrl. Reg. 0
// Message direction is transmit
// extended 29-bit identifier// 5 valid data bytesCAN_messages[1].MCFG = 0x5C;      // Message Config. Reg.
CAN_messages[1].UAR1 = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 1
CAN_messages[1].UAR0 = 0x00;    // Upper Arbit. Reg. 0CAN_messages[1].LAR1 = 0xF8;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 1CAN_messages[1].LAR0 = 0x07;    // Lower Arbit. Reg. 0
CAN_messages[1].Data[0] = 0x00;   // data byte 0
CAN_messages[1].Data[1] = 0x00;   // data byte 1CAN_messages[1].Data[2] = 0x00;   // data byte 2CAN_messages[1].Data[3] = 0x00;   // data byte 3CAN_messages[1].Data[4] = 0x00;   // data byte 4
//  ------ Configure other objects ------------------------------
// Configure remaining message objects (2-14) - none are validfor (Message = 2; Message <= 14; ++Message)
{CAN_messages[Message].MCR1 = 0x55;  // Message Ctrl. Reg. 1CAN_messages[Message].MCR0 = 0x55;  // Message Ctrl. Reg. 0}SCC SCHEDULER 703www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 729 ---
// ------------ CAN Ctrl. Reg. ---------------------
//  reset CCE and INIT// enable interrupt generation from CAN Modul// enable CAN-interrupt of ControllerCAN_cr = 0x02;IEN2 |= 0x02;
// Start the watchdog
SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init();  }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Start()Starts the slave scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Start(void) 
{tByte Tick_00, Tick_ID;bit Start_slave;
// Disable interrupts 
EA = 0;
// We can be at this point because:
// 1. The network has just been powered up// 2. An error has occurred in the Master, and it is not generating// ticks// 3. The network has been damaged and no ticks are being received// by this slave//// Try to make sure the system is in a safe state...// NOTE: Interrupts are disabled hereSCC_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State();
Start_slave = 0;
Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_WAITING_FOR_START_COMMAND_FROM_MASTER;SCH_Report_Status(); // Sch not yet running - do this manually
// Now wait (indefinitely) for appropriate signal from the master
do {MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 704www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 730 ---
// Wait for 'Slave ID' message to be received 
do {
SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(); // Must keep feeding the
// watchdog
} while ((CAN_messages[0].MCR1 & 0x03) != 0x02);  
// Got a message - extract the data 
if ((CAN_messages[0].MCR1 & 0x0c) == 0x08)  // if MSGLST set
{// Ignore lost messageCAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xf7;  // reset MSGLST}
Tick_00 = (tByte) CAN_messages[0].Data[0]; // Get data byte 0 
Tick_ID = (tByte) CAN_messages[0].Data[1]; // Get data byte 1 
CAN_messages[0].MCR0 = 0xfd;  // reset NEWDAT, INTPND
CAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xfd;
if ((Tick_00 == 0x00) && (Tick_ID == SLAVE_ID))
{// Message is correctStart_slave = 1;
// Send ack
CAN_messages[1].Data[0] = 0x00;     // Set data byte 0CAN_messages[1].Data[1] = SLAVE_ID; // Set data byte 1CAN_messages[1].MCR1 = 0xE7;  // Send it}
else
{// Not yet received correct message - waitStart_slave = 0;}
} while (!Start_slave);
// Start the scheduler
IRCON = 0;EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_UpdateThis is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCC_A_SLAVE_Init().SCC SCHEDULER 705www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 731 ---
This Slave is triggered by USART interrupts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_CAN_c515c  
{tByte Index;
// Reset this when tick is received
Network_error_pin = NO_NETWORK_ERROR;
// Check tick data - send ack if necessary
// NOTE: 'START' message will only be sent after a 'timeout'if (SCC_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message() == SLAVE_ID)
{SCC_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master();
// Feed the watchdog ONLY when a *relevant* message is received
// (noise on the bus, etc, will not stop the watchdog...)//// START messages will NOT refresh the slave// - Must talk to every slave at regular intervals SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh();}
// Check the last error codes on the CAN bus via the status register
if ((CAN_sr & 0x07) != 0)
{Error_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CAN_BUS_ERROR;Network_error_pin = NETWORK_ERROR;
// See Infineon c515c manual for error code details
CAN_error_pin0 = ((CAN_sr & 0x01) == 0);CAN_error_pin1 = ((CAN_sr & 0x02) == 0);CAN_error_pin2 = ((CAN_sr & 0x04) == 0);}
else
{CAN_error_pin0 = 1;CAN_error_pin1 = 1;CAN_error_pin2 = 1;}
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationMULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 706www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 732 ---
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe = 1;  // Increment the RunMe flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message()The ticks messages are crucial to the operation of this shared-clock
scheduler: the arrival of a tick message (at regular intervals) invokes the 'Update' ISR, that drives the scheduler.
The tick messages themselves may contain data.  These data are 
extracted in this function. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCC_A_SLAVE_Process_Tick_Message(void)
{tByte Tick_ID;
if ((CAN_messages[0].MCR1 & 0x0c) == 0x08)  // if MSGLST set
{// Indicates that the CAN controller has stored a new // message into this object, while NEWDAT was still set,// i.e. the previously stored message is lost.
// We simply IGNORE this here and reset the flag
CAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xf7;  // reset MSGLST}SCC SCHEDULER 707www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 733 ---
// The first byte is the ID of the slave for which the data are
// intendedTick_ID = CAN_messages[0].Data[0];   // Get data byte 0 (Slave ID)
if (Tick_ID == SLAVE_ID)
{// Only if there is a match do we need to copy these fieldsTick_message_data_G[0] = CAN_messages[0].Data[1];   Tick_message_data_G[1] = CAN_messages[0].Data[2];   Tick_message_data_G[2] = CAN_messages[0].Data[3];   Tick_message_data_G[3] = CAN_messages[0].Data[4];   }
CAN_messages[0].MCR0 = 0xfd;  // reset NEWDAT, INTPND
CAN_messages[0].MCR1 = 0xfd;  
return Tick_ID;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master()Slave must send and 'Acknowledge' message to the master, after
tick messages are received.  NOTE: Only tick messages specificallyaddressed to this slave should be acknowledged.
The acknowledge message serves two purposes:
[1] It confirms to the master that this slave is alive & well.[2] It provides a means of sending data to the master and - hence
- to other slaves.
NOTE: Data transfer between slaves is NOT permitted!
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Send_Ack_Message_To_Master(void)
{// First byte of message must be slave IDCAN_messages[1].Data[0] = SLAVE_ID;   // data byte 0
CAN_messages[1].Data[1] = Ack_message_data_G[0];   
CAN_messages[1].Data[2] = Ack_message_data_G[1];   CAN_messages[1].Data[3] = Ack_message_data_G[2];   CAN_messages[1].Data[4] = Ack_message_data_G[3];   
// Send the message on the CAN bus
CAN_messages[1].MCR1 = 0xE7;  // TXRQ, reset CPUUPD}MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 708www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 734 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init()This function sets up the watchdog timer.If the Master fails (or other error develop), 
no tick messages will arrive, and the schedulerwill stop.  
To detect this situation, we have a (hardware) watchdog
running in the slave.  This watchdog - which should be set tooverflow at around 100 ms - is used to set the system into aknown (safe) state.  The slave will then wait (indefinitely)for the problem to be resolved.
NOTE: The slave will not be generating Ack messages in these 
circumstances.  The Master (if running) will therefore be awarethat there is a problem.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Init(void)   
{// Watchdog timer prescaler (1/16) enabled // Watchdog timer reload value is 0x6B// Watchdog period is 103.2 ms (10.0 MHz xtal, c515c)WDTREL = 0xEB;
// Start watchdog timer
WDT  = 1;SWDT = 1;     }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh()Feed the watchdog.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Watchdog_Refresh(void) reentrant
{WDT  = 1;SWDT = 1;}    
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCC_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State()SCC SCHEDULER 709www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 735 ---
This is the state entered by the system when:
(1) The node is powered up or reset(2) The Master node fails, and no working backup is available(3) The network has an error(4) Tick messages are delayed for any other reason
Try to ensure that the system is in a 'safe' state in these 
circumstances.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCC_A_SLAVE_Enter_Safe_State(void)
{// USER DEFINED TRAFFIC_LIGHTS_Display_Safe_Output();}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 28.2 Part of the software for a shared-clock CAN scheduler (Slave node)
Backup slave software
See the CD for details of the code for the backup Slave.
Further reading
Barrenscheen, J. (1996) ‘On-board communication via CAN without transceiver’,
Infineon (Siemens) Application Note AP2921. [Available from the Infineon WWWsite].
Gergeleit, M. and Streich, H. (1994) ‘Implementing a distributed high-resolution
real-time clock using the CAN-bus’, Proceedings 1st International CAN Conference ,
Mainz, Germany, September 1994.  
Hank, P. and Jöhnk, E. (1997) ‘SJA1000 stand-alone CAN controller’, Philips
Application Note AN97076. [Available from the Philips WWW site].
Lawrenz, W. (1997) CAN System Engineering , Springer.
Scott, G. (1995) ‘Interfacing an MCS 51 microcontroller to an 82527 CAN controller’,
Intel Application Note AP-724. [Available from the Intel WWW site]MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 710www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 736 ---
Designing multiprocessor 
applications
Introduction
There are a number of important design problems which must be addressed when
using shared-clock schedulers. We address some of the key problems in this chapter.Specifically, we consider the following:
GIn DATA UNION [page 712], we consider the problem of transferring (possibly large
amounts of) data between Master and Slave nodes, using a communicationchannel of limited bandwidth.
GIn LONG TASK [page 716], we consider a perennial problem in scheduled systems;
the need to handle both long, infrequently invoked tasks and short, frequentlyinvoked tasks. In this case, we consider techniques for migrating one or more longtask(s) onto a Slave, thereby freeing up the Master node to handle shorter tasks.
GIn DOMINO TASK [page 720], we consider the problem of distributing processing
between tasks operating on two or more network nodes; specifically, we consider thesituation where the tasks are of similar duration and must be invoked in sequence.chapter 29www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 737 ---
DATA UNION
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a shared-clock scheduler.
Problem
How do you transfer data between Master and Slave nodes, using a communicationchannel of limited bandwidth?
Background
Suppose we are using a shared-clock, UART-based scheduler. The communicationchannel is eight bits wide; that is, we can send only eight bits of data between Masterand a Slave (or vice versa) in any network message. How do we transfer, say, integer orfloating-point data over this limited bandwidth channel? This is the type of problemwe are seeking to address in the present pattern.
Solution
To implement DATA UNION , we will use the C union keyword. In C, a union -based
variable can hold, at different times, values of different types and sizes, with the com-piler ensuring that size and alignment are maintained. Different types of data cantherefore be accommodated in a single area of storage.
To create a variable using a union we use the same syntax as the widely used
struct , but whereas a struct -based variable might hold an int, a double and a
char , a union can hold an intora double ora char . 
For example, consider the code in Listing 29.1.
// An example using the C/C++ union keyword
#include <stdio.h>// A user-defined data type based on a union
typedef union
{
int   Integer;float Float;} uNumber;MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 712www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 738 ---
int main(void)
{uNumber Value;
Value.Integer = 100;
printf("%s\n%s\n%s%d\n%s%f\n\n",
"Put a value in the integer member","and print both members.","int:   ", Value.Integer, "float: ", Value.Float);
Value.Float = 100.0f;
printf("%s\n%s\n%s%d\n%s%f\n",
"Put a value in the floating member","and print both members.","int:   ", Value.Integer, "float: ", Value.Float);
return 0;
}
Listing 29.1 An example using the C/C++ union keyword
An output from the program in Listing 29.1 is shown in Figure 29.1.
Careful use of the union keyword can allow the efficient transfer of data between
nodes in a shared-clock network, as we illustrate in the example that follows.
Hardware resource implications
There are no significant hardware resource implications.
Reliability and safety implications
If used as intended here – to transfer data between two 8051 microcontrollers, withcode on each microcontroller created using the same compiler – these techniquesmay be used safely and reliably, without difficulty.DATA UNION 713
FIGURE  29.1 An output from the program in Listing 29.1Put a value in the integer member
and print both members.int:   100float: 0.000000 
Put a value in the floating member
and print both members.int:   0float: 100.000000www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 739 ---
However, if you attempt to use this technique to transfer data to a different micro-
controller or microprocessor family, then problems can arise: see ‘Portability’ forfurther details.
Portability
This technique is portable, in that it can be applied to any microcontroller or micro-
processor. 
That said, the data themselves may not be portable. For example, if you attempt to
use this approach to transfer data between an 8-bit and 16-bit microcontroller or an8-bit microcontroller and a (32-bit) PC, then care must be taken, since the codeassumes that the data (particularly the floating-point data) are of a particular size andstored in a particular byte order; in fact, the size and order of the data varies betweencompilers and operating environments. 
For example, while a float may be represented in four bytes on an 8051 device, an
8-byte or 16-byte representation may be used in other environments. If you attemptto directly interpret an encoded 4-byte float in an 8-byte environment, the results willbe meaningless.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Simple and effective as a way of sending data between 8051 microcon-
trollers over a byte-wide communication channel.
Care must be taken if the technique is used to transfer data between 8- and 16-
or 32-bit environments.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
DATA UNION is a form of MULTI -STAGE TASK [page 317]. 
Example: Transferring floats between microcontrollers
We provide a simple example illustrating the transfer of (32-bit) floats across an 8-bit
communication network here.
// Breaking up floats (etc) for transfer over a serial link
// or via one or more parallel ports
// Assume float is 4 bytes 
typedef union 
{MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 714
Care must therefore be taken if this approach is used to transfer data between
different environments.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 740 ---
float Float;
unsigned char Bytes[4];} uTransfer;
void main()
{uTransfer X,Y;
X.Float = 3.1415f;printf("Original data is %f\n", X.Float);
// Simulate transfer of floats over byte-wide communication link
for (byte = 0; byte < 4; byte++)
{Y.Bytes[byte] = X.Bytes[byte];}
// Now display ‘transferred data’
printf("Original data is %f\n", X.Float);}
Further reading
Schildt, H. (1997) Teach Yourself C , 3rd edn, McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead. DATA UNION 715www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 741 ---
LONG TASK
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a shared-clock scheduler.
Problem
How can you handle both long (infrequent) tasks and short (frequent) tasks in a multi-processor application?
Background
As we have seen, co-operative, time-triggered architectures have many advantages
when we wish to develop embedded applications; indeed, throughout this book wehave argued that we would generally wish to use such an architecture when it is feasi-ble to do so. However, we have also taken a realistic view of the limitations of theco-operative scheduler; in particular we have acknowledged that in some circum-stances there can be a need to run both long, infrequent tasks (e.g. 100 ms durationevery 1,000 ms) and one or more short, frequent task (e.g. 0.1 ms duration every 1ms); these two requirements can conflict in a co-operative system, where – for alltasks, under all circumstances – the worst case execution time (WCET) for a task, thatis, the maximum task duration, must satisfy the condition:
WCET
Task< tick interval
In this pattern collection we have already considered various ways of meeting the
need for both ‘frequent’ and ‘long’ tasks. For example, by using a faster processor (seeChapter 3) or a faster oscillator (Chapter 4) we can shorten the task execution times.Alternatively, we can make use of timeouts (see Chapter 15), develop one or moremulti-stage tasks (see Chapter 16) or use a hybrid scheduler (see Chapter 17).
In this pattern, we consider a multiprocessor solution to this problem. 
Solution
In this pattern, we discuss the design and use of a system architecture which is basedon a shared-clock scheduler and which – at its simplest – takes the following form (seeFigures 29.2 and 29.3):
GA single short task (e.g. WCET 0.1 ms) runs frequently (e.g. every millisecond) onthe Master node. This task may, for example, be used to check for errors or handlesome other activity that requires a rapid response.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 716www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 742 ---
GA single long task (e.g. WCET 500 ms) runs infrequently (e.g. every second) on a
single Slave node. This might be implementing, for example, a data-processing ordata-compression algorithm.
GIn most cases, the Master node and Slave node will have different tick intervals.Specifically, the Master will send tick messages to the Slave at a rate that matchesthe long task duration. For example, in this case, the Master might have a 1 ms tickinterval, while the Slave has a 1,000 ms tick interval; thus, the Master will sendticks to the Slave every 1,000 calls of the (Master) ‘Update’ function.
Note that:
GMultiple Slave nodes may be used.
GAll Slave nodes will generally share the same (usually slow) tick rate.
GAs described, there is no direct means for the Master to abort the Slave processing.LONG TASK 717
FIGURE  29.2 The ‘long task’ architectureMaster
Tick interval T
(e.g. 1 ms)
Tick messages (from Master to Slaves)Acknowledgement message (Slave to Master)Slave
Tick interval nT
(e.g. 1000 ms)
FIGURE  29.3 The task structure in the ‘long task’ architectureTask A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task A Task AProcessor 1Task BProcessor 2
Timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 743 ---
Hardware resource implications
This pattern requires the use of at least two microcontrollers and associated hardware
(for example, reset, oscillator, memory and power supplies).
Reliability and safety implications
The correct operation of LONG TASK depends on all the microcontrollers involved
operating normally. This requirement can, under some circumstances, reduce theoverall reliability of your system: see page 550 for a discussion of this issue.
Portability
This general design pattern may be applied with any microcontroller or microproces-sor family.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
An effective way of supporting the execution of both long, infrequent tasks
and short, frequent tasks.
Like any multiprocessor design, it must be used with care if overall system
reliability is not to be compromised.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
GSee HYBRID SCHEDULER [page 333].
GSee DATA UNION [page 712].
GSee DOMINO TASK [page 720]. 
Example: Data acquisition and FFT
In many condition-monitoring applications, we need to:
GAcquire data, via an ADC
GPerform a fast Fourier transform (FFT) on these data, prior to subsequent processing
The data-acquisition process will be very short, typically requiring a fraction of a
millisecond to complete. By contrast, the FFT operation may be carried out every timewe have amassed, say, 256 data samples. It is a computationally intense process (e.g.see Press et al., 1992; Lynn and Fuerst, 1998; Smith, 1999) and must usually be com-
pleted before the next set of 256 samples has been acquired.
Use of the 
LONG TASK architecture is ideal in these circumstances.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 718www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 744 ---
Further reading
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.
Press, W.H., Teulolsky, S.A., Vettering, W.T. and Flannery, B.P. (1992) Numerical Recipes
in C: The Art of Scientific Computing , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, S.W. (1999) The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing , 2nd
edn, California Technical Publishing. [Available electronically atwww.DSPguide.com]LONG TASK 719www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 745 ---
DOMINO TASK
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using more than one member of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, based on a shared-clock scheduler.
Problem
How do you make best use of an architecture involving more than one microcon-troller when you must use tasks that are scheduled consecutively?
Background
The improved performance achieved through the use of more than one microcon-troller is superficially obvious: if one microcontroller has a performance of 1 MIP andwe need 2 MIPs, we can use two processors. 
In reality, the situation is rather more complicated. Because of the need for com-
munication between the two processors, we will not necessarily get a doubling inperformance: indeed, we may see a performance decrease in some circumstances.
Consider, for example, that we are required to perform three consecutive tasks
(Task A, Task B, Task C) on some data obtained from a ‘data source’, as indicated inFigure 29.4.
If we use one processor to perform these tasks, the time taken to perform the three
tasks and generate ‘Data C’ will be:
Duration
1= A+ B+ C+ TransferA–B+ TransferB–C
That is, the total duration is the duration of Task A, plus the duration of Task B and
Task C, plus the time taken to transfer the intermediate data between various tasks.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 720
FIGURE  29.4 Performing three consecutive tasksTask
C
3Task
B
2Data
sourceTask
A
1Raw data Data C Data B Data A(Task C duration = C) (Task B duration = B) (Task A duration = A)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 746 ---
Now, suppose we carry out the same activity on three different microprocessors,
each with a performance level the same as that assumed in the first example. Thetime taken will be:
Duration
3= A + B + C + TransferA–B+ TransferB–C
In this case, the second processor must wait for the Data A to become available
before it can begin processing and the third processor must wait for Data B before itcan begin processing: as a result, we see no immediate performance improvement.Worse, if we make the reasonable assume that the time taken to transfer the databetween tasks is greater where the two tasks are running on different processors, thenthe overall duration will be greater in the three-processor situation. 
However, this is not the only way of assessing the performance of this application.
If, instead of the task duration, we focus on the data coverage , we see a different pic-
ture. Consider Figure 29.5.
In Figure 29.5 we illustrate, in a simplified form, the single-processor version of the
three-task system. Here, during the execution of Task B, we are unable to obtain data.As a result, if Task A and Task B are of similar duration, then for approximately halfthe time, no data capture is being carried out.
Compare this with Figure 29.6.DOMINO TASK 721
FIGURE  29.5 Running three consecutive tasks on a single processor can lead to loss of dataTask B Task A Task C Task A
Time
Data not obtained during this period
FIGURE  29.6 Running three consecutive tasks on a multiprocessor architecture can avoid loss of dataTask C Task C Task C Task C
Time
Data obtained throughout this periodProcessor 3
Task B Task B Task B Task BProcessor 2
Task B Task A Task A Task AProcessor 1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 747 ---
In Figure 29.6, we ‘domino schedule’ (or pipeline) Task A, Task B and Task C. At
each interval of time, Task A processes new data and Task B processes the results ofthe previous Task A run.
In this case, we refer to Task B and Task C as domino tasks .
Solution
The key factor involved in determining whether a domino task architecture is appro-
priate for your application is the worst case execution time for the various tasks.
For example, consider Figure 29.6. For maximum efficiency, Task A, Task B and
Task C must be of similar duration. Where this condition is not satisfied the ‘domino’architecture is inappropriate and the gains in performance obtained through the useof the additional processor will be greatly reduced. 
Where we have tasks of different duration, we can still obtain benefits from the use
of multiple processors, but we need to use a different software architecture: see 
LONG
TASK [page 716] for details.
Note that, if we require complete data coverage, Task A must have a duration
greater than or equal to the duration of Task B and Task B must have a durationgreater than or equal to that of Task C. If these conditions are not met, we have threemain options:
1Use a faster processor to reduce the execution time of Task B and / or Task C.
2Split one or more of the tasks in such a way that they run as two successive
(shorter) tasks; for example, split Task B into Task B1 and Task B2 and run each,successively, on two processors.
3Split one or more of the tasks in such a way that they run as two parallel (shorter)
tasks; for example, split Task B into Task B1 and Task B2 and run each, consecu-tively, on two processors.
Hardware resource implications
This pattern requires the use of at least two microcontrollers and associated hardware(for example, reset, oscillator, memory and power supplies).
Reliability and safety implications
The correct operation of DOMINO TASK depends on all the microcontrollers involved
operating normally. This requirement can, under some circumstances, reduce theoverall reliability of your system: see page 550 for a discussion of this issue.
Portability
This general design pattern may be applied with any microcontroller or microproces-sor family.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 722www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 748 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
An effective way of ‘pipelining’ tasks.
Like any multiprocessor design, it must be used with care if overall system relia-
bility is not to be compromised.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See HYBRID SCHEDULER [page 333].
See LONG TASK [page 716].
See DATA UNION [page 720].
Example: Condition monitoring and control
Use of DOMINO TASKis particularly common in condition monitoring and control
applications, of the type discussed in Part G.
For example, various condition monitoring systems we have worked on have taken
the form illustrated in Figure 29.7.
These applications have three main phases:
GA data-acquisition and pre-processing phase, typically involving interaction withan ADC.
GA time-frequency transform phase (typically involving a fast Fourier transform:FFT).
GA classification phase, possibly involving a neural network.
In each case, the phases have a similar duration. The domino task architecture is
therefore highly appropriate.
See Li et al. (1999, 2000) and Parikh et al. (2001) for further details of this type
of application.
Further reading
Li, Y., Pont, M.J., and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘A comparison of the performance of radial basis
function and multi-layer Perceptron networks in a practical condition monitoringapplication’, Proceedings of Condition Monitoring , Swansea, UK, 12–15 April, 
1999.DOMINO TASK 723
FIGURE  29.7 The architecture of a typical condition-monitoring applicationADCClassify
data
(MLP)
3Perform
FFT
2Acquire,
filter and
decimate
data
1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 749 ---
Li, Y., Pont, M.J., Parikh, C.R. and Jones, N.B. (2000) ‘Using a combination of RBFN,
MLP and kNN classifiers for engine misfire detection’, R. John, and R. Birkenhead(eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft Computing Techniques and Applications ,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Parikh, C.R., Pont, M.J., Li, Y. and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘Improving the performance of
multi-layer Perceptrons where limited training data are available for some classes’,Proceedings of the IEE International Conference on Neural Networks , Edinburgh,
September 1999.
Parikh C.R., M.J. Pont and N.B. Jones (2001) ‘Application of Dempster-Shafer
theory in condition monitoring applications – a case study’, Pattern Recognition
Letters, 22(6–7): 777–85.MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS 724www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 750 ---
Monitoring and control 
components
The penultimate group of patterns presented in this book are intended for use in data
acquisition, condition monitoring and control systems. As in previous parts, we are con-cerned with techniques which are appropriate for use in systems employing atime-triggered software architecture.
We begin in Chapter 30 by considering the counting of pulses. These techniques are in
widespread use in many industrial applications and throughout the automotive industry.
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT [page 728] and SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT [page 736] present,
respectively, hardware-based and software-only techniques for pulse counting.
In Chapter 31, we address pulse-rate modulation: that is, the generation of square-wave
signals of a specified frequency. Again, two patterns are presented: HARDWARE PRM [page
742] and SOFTWARE PRM [page 748].
In Chapter 32 we consider how we can use an 8051 microcontroller to measure ana-
logue voltage or current signals. These may, for example, represent the battery voltage ina charger application: more generally, such signals can come from an enormous range ofsensors, such as potentiometers or temperature probes. The patterns 
ONE-SHOT ADC
[page 757] and SEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782s] discuss how to make effective use of
on-chip and off-chip analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs). Also in this chapter, thepatterns 
ADC PRE -AMP [page 777] and A-A FILTER [page 794] consider important pre-
processing stages that may be required before an analogue signal is measured. Finally, thepattern 
CURRENT SENSOR [page 802] considers how we can use analogue measurements
for current-sensing applications, such as detecting blown bulbs or stalled DC motors.
In Chapter 33 we explore how analogue outputs from the microcontroller – generated
in the form of pulse-width modulated signals – can be used in applications such as set-ting the speed of motors or controlling the brightness of bulbs. Again, both hardware-part gwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 751 ---
and software-based techniques are considered, in the patterns HARDWARE PWM [page
808] and SOFTWARE PWM [page 831]. We also consider the post-processing that may be
required to filter PWM-based signals, through the pattern PWM SMOOTHER [page 818]
and the creation of a high-frequency PWM output without using specialized hardware inthe pattern 3-
LEVEL PWM [page 822].
In Chapter 34 we consider how analogue outputs from the microcontroller may be gen-
erated using digital-to-analogue converter (DAC) hardware (see DAC OUTPUT [page
841]). We consider the post-processing that may be required to filter and / or amplifyDAC-derived signals, through the patterns 
DAC SMOOTHER [page 853] and DAC DRIVER
[page 857].
Finally, in Chapter 35, we turn our attention to proportional-integral-differential (PID)
control. PID is both simple and effective: as a consequence it is the most widely used con-trol algorithm. The focus in this chapter is on techniques for designing and implementingPID controllers for use in embedded, time-triggered applications.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 726www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 752 ---
Pulse-rate sensing
Introduction
Suppose we wish to measure the speed of a rotating shaft. This could be part, for
example, of an automotive or industrial application. 
An effective way of measuring the speed is to attach an optically or magnetically
based rotary encoder to the shaft (Figure 30.1), and to count the number of pulsesthat occur over a fixed period of time (say 100 ms or 1 second). From the count, andhaving details of the rotary encoder, we can calculate the average speed of rotation.
In this chapter we consider how pulses may be counted. The technique we discuss
may be used not just for the measurement of rotational speed but also, for example,in liquid flow-rate measurement and in the sensing of vibration.chapter 30
FIGURE  30.1 Counting pulses from an optical encoder in order to measure the speed of rotation of a
shaftRotating
shaftTo counter inputOptical
sensorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 753 ---
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you count rectangular pulses arriving from an external peripheral?
Background
—
Solution
Consider the train of pulses obtained from the rotary encoder discussed in the intro-duction to this chapter.
Where we have sufficient hardware resources available, we can often determine the
average pulse rate from this stream largely without software intervention. Timer 0 orTimer 1
1will count pulses (more specifically, the falling edges of pulses) on external
pins, without generating interrupts and without interfering with any other processing. 
The key to HARDWARE PULSE COUNT is the setting of the TMOD SFR (Table 30.1).
In Table 30.1, most of the features of TMOD have been discussed previously (see
Chapter 11). Here we are particularly concerned with the ‘counter’ bits (6 and 2). Ifeither of these bits is set to 0, then the corresponding timer is set to counter mode. MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 728
TABLE 30.1 The TMOD SFR, used to control Timer 0 and Timer 1
Bit 7 (MSB) 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 (LSB)
Name Gate C/T–M1 M0 Gate C/T–M1 M0
Timer 1 Timer 0
1. In many cases, as we saw in Chapter 3, modern ‘8051’ family devices are based on the slightly later
8052 architecture: such devices include an extra, more powerful timer (Timer 2). Timer 2 can also beused to count pulses; however, as we discussed in Chapters 13 and 14, we prefer to use this timer –where available – as a source of scheduler ticks. We will therefore not discuss the use of Timer 2 forpulse counting here.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 754 ---
For example:
// Timer 0 used as 16-bit timer, counting pulses 
// (falling edges) on Pin 3.4 (T0 pin)TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x05; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) 
In this case, the Timer 0 registers (TL0 and TH0) are incremented in response to a
transition (1-to-0) at its corresponding external input pin (Figure 30.2). The pin issampled every machine cycle. When the samples show a high in one cycle and a lowin the next cycle, the count is incremented. The new count value then appears in theregister in the cycle following the one in which the transition was detected. HARDWARE PULSE COUNT 729
FIGURE  30.2 Reading pulse countsP 1.0 [T2]
P 1.1 [T2EX]P 1.2P 1.3P 1.4P 1.5P 1.6P 1.7
RSTP 3.0 (RXD)
P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.7 (/RD)
XTL2
XTL1P 0.0 (AD0)
P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.7 (AD7)
/ EA
ALE (PROG)
/PSEN
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
8051
VSS39
38373635343332
31
3029
28
2726252423222112345678
9
10
11121314151617
18
19
2040
Counter inputs
There are no restrictions on the duty cycle of the waveform that we can monitor using
this approach, but – to ensure accurate measurement – the ‘high’ and ‘low’ levelsshould be held for at least one full machine cycle (12 oscillator cycles in an original8051; 6, 4 or 1 oscillator cycle(s) in some more recent variants). As a result, it takes atLwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 755 ---
We can use this information efficiently to measure the rotational speed in the pre-
vious example by creating a task that operates as follows:
1Read the current hardware pulse count. 
2Store the result in a global variable. 
3Reset the count to 0.
We need to schedule this task for repeated execution (say every 100 ms). 
We give a code example that illustrates this approach in a following example. 
Hardware resource implications
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT requires exclusive access to a timer. In many cases, Timer 2
will be used for the scheduler and Timer 1 may be used for baud-rate generation. Thiswill only leave Timer 0 for this purpose. Where this is not available (or you need tomeasure multiple pulse trains) you will need to consider software-based techniques:see 
SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT [page 736] or the use of an additional microcontroller
(see Part F).
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability and safety implications, provided you do not attemptto count pulses beyond the limits of your hardware (see ‘Solution’ for details).
Portability
This pattern uses only core 8051 features: there are no specific portability implications.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT imposes a minimal software overhead.
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT requires exclusive access to a timer for each pulse
train you wish to count.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
There are two main alternatives to HARDWARE PULSE COUNT .MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 730
least two machine cycles (24, 12, 8 or 2 oscillator cycles) to detect a 1-to-0 transition.
This determines the maximum pulse rate that you can measure: for example, on abasic 12 Mhz / 12 oscillator cycle 8051, the maximum pulse rate (square wave) thatwe can measure has a period of 24 oscillator cycles (2 µs), and a frequency of 500 kHz.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 756 ---
The closest match is SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT [page 736]: this performs in a similar
way, but does not require the use of timer hardware. Inevitably, this imposes a largersoftware load than the present pattern.
Alternatively, you can use external hardware to convert the pulse train to an
analog voltage, which may then be measured using an on-chip or external analogue-to-digital converter (ADC). Various ‘frequency-to-voltage’ conversion chips areavailable to assist with this process, such as the National Semiconductor
2LM2907 and
LM2917. The use of an ADC is discussed in ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757].
Note that the use of an ADC (and associated hardware) will not allow you to count,
precisely, the number of pulses that occur: this approach would probably not beappropriate, for example, for counting visitors passing through a turnstile. However,if you require a measure of the average pulse count – as in some forms of speed meas-urement – then this solution may be adequate. Note, however, that there may besignificant hardware costs involved.
Example: Generic pulse-count (hardware) library
A simple pulse-count (hardware) library is presented in Listings 30.1 to 30.3.
This library counts pulses on Pin 3.4 and displays the results in the form of a
bargraph on Port 1.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PC_Hard (see Chap 30)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P2
#endif// ------ Bargraph.C -----------------------------------------------HARDWARE PULSE COUNT 731
2.www.national.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 757 ---
// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]// The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if required
sbit Pin0 = P1^0;
sbit Pin1 = P1^1;sbit Pin2 = P1^2;sbit Pin3 = P1^3;sbit Pin4 = P1^4;sbit Pin5 = P1^5;sbit Pin6 = P1^6;sbit Pin7 = P1^7;
// ------ PulCnt_H.c -----------------------------------------------// Counts pulses on P3.4 (using Timer 0)/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.1 Part of a generic pulse-count (hardware) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo application for Hardware Pulse Count (Chapter 30).Required linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):OVERLAY 
(main ~ (PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0, BARGRAPH_Update), SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0, BARGRAPH_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"#include "2_01_12g.h"#include "PulCnt_H.h"
#include "BarGraph.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 732www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 758 ---
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT 733
void main(void)
{SCH_Init_T2();      // Set up the schedulerPC_HARD_Init_T0();      // Prepare to count pulsesBARGRAPH_Init();    // Prepare a bargraph-type display 
// Add a 'pulse count' task 
SCH_Add_Task(PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0, 1000, 1000);// Simply display the count here (bargraph display)SCH_Add_Task(BARGRAPH_Update, 1200, 1000);
// All tasks added: start running the scheduler
SCH_Start(); 
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.2 Part of a generic pulse-count (hardware) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PulCnt_H.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Hardware pulse count library (see Chapter 30).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Bargraph.h"#include "PulCnt_H.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// Global count variable – stores the latest count value
extern tBargraph Count_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 759 ---
PC_HARD_Init_T0()
Prepare for 'Hardware Pulse Count' using Timer 0.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/void PC_HARD_Init_T0(void)
{// Timer 0 used as 16-bit timer, counting pulses // (falling edges) on Pin 3.4 (T0 pin)TMOD &= 0xF0;      // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x05;      // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) TH0 = 0; TL0 = 0;  // Set timer count to 0Count_G = 0;       // Set global count to 0
TR0 = 1;           // Start the counter
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0()Schedule this function at regular intervals.Remember: max count is 65536 (16-bit counter)
– it is your responsibility to ensure this countis not exceeded.  Choose an appropriate scheduleinterval and allow a margin for error.
For high-frequency pulses, you need to take account of
the fact that the count is stopped for a (very brief) period,to read the counter.  
Note: the delay before the first count is taken should 
generally be the same as the inter-count interval,to ensure that the first count is as accurate as possible.
For example, this is OK:
Sch_Add_Task(PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0, 1000, 1000);
While this will give a very low first count:
Sch_Add_Task(PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0, 10, 1000);
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_HARD_Get_Count_T0(void)
{TR0 = 0; // Stop counter
Count_G = (TH0 << 8) + TL0;  // Read countTH0 = 0; TL0 = 0;           // Reset countMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 734www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 760 ---
if (TF0 == 1)
{// Timer has overflowed // – pulse frequency too high // – or schedule rate too low
// We code this error as a 'max count'
// – could also set a global error flag, if requiredCount_G = 65536;TF0 = 0;}
TR0 = 1; // Restart counter}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.3 Part of a generic pulse-count (hardware) example
Further reading
—HARDWARE PULSE COUNT 735www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 761 ---
SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you count pulses arriving from an external peripheral?
Background
See HARDWARE PULSE COUNT [page 582] for background details.
Solution
HARDWARE PULSE COUNT requires exclusive access to a timer. 
Where this timer is not available and comparatively low pulse rates are to be meas-
ured, software-only pulse counting is possible. 
Software-based pulse counting involves a periodic task that keeps track of the state
of one or more input pins. When a pin changes state in the interval between taskinvocations, we increment the corresponding count by 1. The main drawback is themaximum pulse rate: with a 1 ms scheduler, the maximum pulse rate we can measureis 500 Hz: this is around 1,000 times less than can be measured using 
HARDWARE
PULSE COUNT [page 730].
Hardware resource implications
This pattern uses no on-chip hardware components.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability and safety implications.
Portability
This code has no hardware requirements and may be readily ported to a different
microcontroller environment, provided that the new environment also uses a sched-uler operating at the same tick rate.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT does not require a timer.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 736www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 762 ---
The main drawback is the maximum pulse rate. With a 1 ms scheduler, the
maximum pulse rate we can measure is 500 Hz: this is around 1,000 times lessthan can be measured using hardware.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The main alternative to SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT is HARDWARE PULSE COUNT
[page 728].
Example: Generic pulse-count (software) library
A simple pulse-count (software) library is presented in Listings 30.4 to 30.6.
This library counts pulses on Pin 3.0 and displays the results in the form of a bar-
graph on Port 1.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PC_Soft
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P2
#endif// ------ Bargraph.C -----------------------------------------------
// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]// The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if requiredsbit Pin0 = P1^0;sbit Pin1 = P1^1;sbit Pin2 = P1^2;sbit Pin3 = P1^3;sbit Pin4 = P1^4;sbit Pin5 = P1^5;sbit Pin6 = P1^6;sbit Pin7 = P1^7;
// ------ PulCnt_S.c -----------------------------------------------SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT 737www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 763 ---
MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 738
sbit Count_pin = P3^0;                                        
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.4 Part of a generic pulse-count (software) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo application for Software Pulse CountRequired linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):
OVERLAY 
(main ~ (PC_SOFT_Poll_Count, PC_SOFT_Get_Count, BARGRAPH_Update), SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (PC_SOFT_Poll_Count, PC_SOFT_Get_Count, 
BARGRAPH_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.h"#include "2_01_12g.h"
#include "PulCnt_S.h"
#include "BarGraph.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{SCH_Init_T2();   // Set up the schedulerPC_SOFT_Init();      // Prepare to count pulsesBARGRAPH_Init(); // Prepare a bargraph-type display (P4)
// TIMING IS IN TICKS (1 ms interval)
// Add a 'pulse count poll' task 
// Every 40 millisecondsSCH_Add_Task(PC_SOFT_Poll_Count, 0, 20);
// Add a 'pulse get count' task 
// Every 20 secondsSCH_Add_Task(PC_SOFT_Get_Count, 0, 20000);
// Simply display the count here (bargraph display)
// Max count is ~250SCH_Add_Task(BARGRAPH_Update, 50, 10000);www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 764 ---
SOFTWARE PULSE COUNT 739
// All tasks added: start running the scheduler
SCH_Start();   
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.5 Part of a generic pulse-count (software) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PulCnt_S.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Software pulse count library (see Chapter 30).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Bargraph.h"
#include "PulCnt_S.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions -----------------------------
// Stores the average count value
extern tBargraph Count_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
#define PULSE_HIGH (1)
#define PULSE_LOW (0)
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------
// Stores the instantaneous count value
static tWord Count_local_G;
// The previous state of the pulse-count pin
static bit Previous_state_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_SOFT_Init() 
Prepare for software pulse counts.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 765 ---
MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 740
void PC_SOFT_Init(void)
{Count_local_G = 0;Count_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_SOFT_Poll_Count()Using software to count falling edges on a specified pin
– T0 is *NOT* used here.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_SOFT_Poll_Count(void)
{bit State = Count_pin;
if ((Previous_state_G == PULSE_HIGH) && (State == PULSE_LOW))
{Count_local_G++;} 
Previous_state_G = State;     
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PC_SOFT_Get_Count()Schedule this function at regular intervals.Copies 'polled' count to global variable.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PC_SOFT_Get_Count(void)
{Count_G = Count_local_G;Count_local_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 30.6 Part of a generic pulse-count (software) example
Further reading
—www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 766 ---
Pulse-rate modulation
Introduction
In this chapter we consider how you can create pulse streams (sometimes called
‘clock-outs’) of different frequencies. 
Such streams have various applications, from the driving of simple flashing lights
and sirens (Figure 31.1), controlling the brightness of lamps, controlling the speed ofDC motors, through to test circuits for pulse-rate sensors.chapter 31
FIGURE  31.1 A pulse-rate modulated output used to control the frequency of a sirenPulse-rate modulated outputwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 767 ---
HARDWARE PRM
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create a pulse-rate modulated output (a ‘clock-out’) of variable frequency,while imposing a minimal software load?
Background
We consider some basic background material in this section.
Duty cycles
Pulse-rate modulation is carried out by setting a port pin to Logic 1 for a period ( x)
and then to Logic 0 for another period ( y). We then repeat this process (Figure 31.2).
The duty cycle is defined as follows:
xDuty cycle (%) =            ×100x + y
In this pattern, we are concerned only with signals which have a 50% duty cycle:
that is, where xand yare equal. 
The pulse-rate frequency is, in these circumstances, given by:
1Frequency =      , where xis in seconds.2xMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 742
FIGURE  31.2 The underlying principles of pulse-rate modulationV
Timey xwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 768 ---
Timer 2
As we saw in Chapter 3, the original 8052 and most modern ‘8051’ devices contain an
additional timer, known as Timer 2. This pattern requires the use of Timer 2. 
Refer to Chapter 3 for basic background on Timer 2 and to Chapter 11 for basic
information on timers.
Solution
Using Timer 2 (see ‘Background’), Pin 1.0 can be programmed to output a 50% dutycycle clock.
To configure this timer
3as a clock generator, bit C/T2 (T2CON.1) must be cleared
and bit T2OE (T2MOD.1) must be set. Bit TR2 (T2CON.2) starts and stops the timer.The clock-out frequency depends on the oscillator frequency and the reload value ofTimer 2 capture registers (RCAP2H, RCAP2L), as shown in the following equation.
Frequency
OscillatorFrequencypulse= 
4 × (65536 – RCAP2H , RCAP2L )
For example, the minimum frequency with a 12 MHz crystal is:
12000000
Frequencymin=                      = 45.78 Hz
4 × (65536)
Similarly, the maximum frequency is:
12000000
Frequencymax=                  = 3.0 MHz
4
In the clock-out mode, Timer 2 rollovers will not generate an interrupt. 
This behaviour is similar to when Timer 2 is used as a baud-rate generator and it is
possible to use Timer 2 as a baud-rate generator and a clock generator simultaneously.Note, however, that the baud rate and clock-out frequencies cannot be determinedindependently from one another since they both use RCAP2H and RCAP2L.
Hardware resource implications
This pattern requires the use of Timer 2. In single-processor applications, Timer 2 isoften the most suitable timer to use to drive the scheduler itself; as a result, use of thistechnique may have an impact on other parts of the application.
Note that, if a two-processor solution is possible (using a UART- or interrupt-based
scheduler, for example), then Timer 2 can be used to drive the scheduler in the MasterHARDWARE PRM 743
3. As we discussed in Chapters 3 and 11, different implementations of Timer 2 are used in various 8051
family members; the names of some of the registers can therefore vary. This description appliesspecifically to the Atmel 89x52 / 89x53 devices but may be applied with minor modifications toother family members.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 769 ---
node, leaving Timer 2 in the Slave node free for use as a PRM generator: see Part F for
details of various multiprocessor solutions that may be appropriate here.
Reliability and safety implications
This technique is very reliable.
Portability
This technique may only be used with 8052-based devices: that is, those with animplementation of Timer 2 available. While most modern ‘8051s’ have such a timer,some popular devices, such as the Atmel Small 8051s, do not.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple, effective technique for creating PRM signals over a very wide fre-quency range.
Imposes no measurable software or CPU load. Requires exclusive use of Timer 2.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The most directly comparable pattern is SOFTWARE PRM [page 748]. In addition, SOFT -
WARE PWM [page 831], HARDWARE PWM [page 808] and particularly 3-LLEVEL PWM
[page 822] can form the basis of alternative solutions under some circumstances.
As we noted in ‘Hardware resource implications’, it may be appropriate to use this
technique in a Slave node in a multiprocessor application. Refer to the various pat-terns in Part F for further information on this topic.
Example: Hardware PRM on the ‘8052’
An example of software to control hardware-based pulse-rate modulation is given inthis section.
In Listings 31.1 and 31.2, we use a 16-bit (unsigned) integer variable
(PRM_reload_G ) to control the pulse frequency. The resulting frequency, as discussed
earlier, is as follows:
Frequency
OscillatorFrequencypulse=
4 ×(65536 – RCAP2H ,RCAP2L )
Thus, with a 12 MHz oscillator, the pulse rate will increase slowly from 45Hz to
3MHz (approximately), repeatedly.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 744www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 770 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo of hardware PRM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "PRM_Hard.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------
extern tWord PRM_reload_G;/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{tLong Count = 0;
PRM_Hardware_Init();while(1)
{if (++Count > 10000UL)
{// Slowly change the PRM frequencyPRM_reload_G++;
PRM_Hardware_Update();Count = 0;
}
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 31.1 Part of a generic pulse-rate modulation (hardware-based) example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Hard.C (v1.00)HARDWARE PRM 745www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 771 ---
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple library demonstrating hardware (T2) pulse-rate modulation.
See Chapter 31 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------tWord PRM_reload_G = 0;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Hardware_Init()Start PRM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PRM_Hardware_Init(void)
{T2CON &= 0xFD;   // Clear *only* C /T2 bitT2MOD |= 0x02;   // Set T2OE bit  (omit in basic 8052 clone)
// Start at lowest frequency (~45Hz with 12MHz xtal)
TL2     = 0x00;   // Timer 2 low byteTH2     = 0x00;   // Timer 2 high byteRCAP2L  = 0x00;   // Timer 2 reload capture register, low byteRCAP2H  = 0x00;   // Timer 2 reload capture register, high byte
ET2   = 0; // No interrupt.TR2   = 1; // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Hardware_Update()Call this function only when you need to change the pulse rate. See text for details of resulting PRM frequency.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PRM_Hardware_Update(void)
{TR2 = 0;
TL2    = PRM_reload_G % 256;
RCAP2L = TL2;TH2    = PRM_reload_G / 256;MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 746www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 772 ---
RCAP2H = TH2;
TR2 = 1;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 31.2 Part of a generic pulse-rate modulation (hardware-based) example
Further reading
—HARDWARE PRM 747www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 773 ---
SOFTWARE PRM
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create a square- or rectangular-wave output pulse with particular pulse-width and frequency characteristics without using on-chip hardware?
Background
Refer to HARDWARE PRM [page 742] for basic background information on pulse-
rate modulation.
Solution
Creating an output that is pulse-rate modulated using a scheduler is easy to do: infact, all our introductory examples did just this. For example, consider Listing 31.3,first presented in Chapter 14.
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Init();
// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// – timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 1000);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 748www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 774 ---
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();
}
}
Listing 31.3 A simple form of pulse-rate modulation (software based)
The ‘flash LED’ task itself may be implemented as shown in Listing 31.4.
void LED_Flash_Update(void)
{// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)if (LED_state_G == 1)
{LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}
}
Listing 31.4 A ‘flash LED’ task
This code flashes an LED at a 0.5Hz rate: it could, of course, drive various other
devices, if we use an appropriate hardware interface.
The same technique may be readily adapted to allow us to perform low-frequency
software PRM, at variable frequencies: Listing 31.5 illustrates this.
void PRM_Soft_Update(void)
{// Increment the 'position' variable if (++PRM_position_G >= PRM_period_G)
{PRM_position_G = 0;
PRM_period_G = PRM_period_new_G; PRM_pin = 0;return;
}
// Generate the PRM output
if (PRM_position_G < (PRM_period_G / 2))SOFTWARE PRM 749www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 775 ---
{
PRM_pin = 1;}
else
{PRM_pin = 0;}
}
Listing 31.5 Implementing variable-frequency software PRM
The key to Listing 31.5 is the use of the variables PRM_position_G,
PRM_period_G and PRM_period_new_G :
GPRM_period_G is the current PRM period. It is not varied by the user. Note that if
the update function is scheduled every millisecond, this period is in milliseconds.
GPRM_period_new_G is the next PRM period. This period may be varied by the user,
as required. Note that the ‘new’ value is only copied to PRM_period_G at the end
of a PRM cycle, to avoid noise. Again, the units are milliseconds, if the updatefunction is scheduled every millisecond.
GPRM_position_G is the current position in the PRM cycle. This is incremented by
the update function. Again, the units are milliseconds if the same conditions apply.
The link between PRM_period_G , PRM_position_G and the PRM output is illus-
trated in Figure 31.3.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 750
FIGURE  31.3 Implementing pulse-rate modulation in softwareif (PRM_position_G < (PRM_period_G / 2))
   {   PRM_pin = 1:   }else   {   PRM_pin = 0:   }PRM_period_G
PRM_position_Gwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 776 ---
Hardware resource implications
This pattern imposes a minimal software or hardware load.
Reliability and safety implications
This approach is reliable.
Portability
This software is based entirely on the core scheduler code: as a result, like the sched-
uler itself, it is inherently portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Simple and easy to use, with minimal CPU or memory overheads.
Can produce very low frequency signals with ease.The maximum frequency is limited by the scheduler itself: if the scheduler tick
period is T (seconds), then the maximum pulse rate is 1/2T (Hz).
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See HARDWARE PRM [page 742] for an alternative solution.
Example: Software PRM on the 8051 (generic code)
A simple example of a complete software PRM library is given in Listings 31.6 to 31.8.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PRM_Soft
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P2SOFTWARE PRM 751www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 777 ---
#endif
// ------ PRM_Soft.c -----------------------------------------------// The PRM output pin
sbit PRM_pin = P2^0;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 31.6 Part of an example demonstrating software-based pulse-rate modulation
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo of Software PRM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h"#include "PRM_Soft.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main()
{SCH_Init_T2();  
PRM_Soft_Init();  // Call every millisecond to update PRM output
SCH_Add_Task(PRM_Soft_Update, 10, 1);
// Call every minute to change PRM control value
SCH_Add_Task(PRM_Soft_Test, 0, 60000);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}     
} MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 752www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 778 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 31.7 Part of an example demonstrating software-based pulse-rate modulation
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Soft.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple Software PRM library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h"
#include "PRM_Soft.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Set this variable to the required PRM value
tWord PRM_period_new_G; 
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------// The PRM counter
static tWord PRM_position_G;static tByte PRM_period_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Soft_Init()Prepare for software PRM.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PRM_Soft_Init(void)
{// Init the main variablePRM_period_G = 2;PRM_period_new_G = 2;
PRM_position_G = 0;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-SOFTWARE PRM 753www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 779 ---
PRM_Soft_Update()
Update the software PRM output. We have three key variables (see text for details):1. PRM_period_G is the PRM period
(units are milliseconds, if we schedule once / ms)
2. PRM_period_new_G is the new PRM period, set by the user
(The 'new' value is copied to PRM-period only at the
end of a cycle, to avoid noise)
(units are milliseconds, if we schedule once / ms)
3. PRM_position_G is the current position in the PRM cycle
(units are milliseconds, if we schedule once / ms)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PRM_Soft_Update(void)
{// Increment the 'position' variable if (++PRM_position_G >= PRM_period_G)
{PRM_position_G = 0;
PRM_period_G = PRM_period_new_G; PRM_pin = 0;return;
}
// Generate the PRM output
if (PRM_position_G < (PRM_period_G / 2))
{PRM_pin = 1;}
else
{PRM_pin = 0;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PRM_Soft_Test()To test the PRM library, this function is called once every 
minute, to change the PRM output setting.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 754www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 780 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PRM_Soft_Test(void)
{PRM_period_new_G += 2;
if (PRM_period_new_G >= 60000)
{PRM_period_new_G = 2;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 31.8 Part of an example demonstrating software-based pulse-rate modulation
Further reading
—SOFTWARE PRM 755www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 781 ---
Using analogue-to-digital
converters (ADCs)
Introduction
The recording of analog signals is an important part of many condition monitoring,
data acquisition and control applications. 
We will consider how to read analog values using an 8051 microcontroller in this
chapter. In doing so, we will present the following patterns:
GONE-SHOT ADC [page 757] addresses the problem of measuring an analogue voltage
signal at irregular (or infrequent) intervals, using a microcontroller
GADC PRE -AMP [page 777] addresses the problem of amplifying an analogue signal, in
order to convert it to a range suitable for subsequent analogue-to-digital conversion.
GSEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782] addresses the problem of recording a sequence of ana-
logue samples using a microcontroller.
GA-A FILTER [page 794] addresses the problem of filtering an analogue signal to
remove high-frequency components.
GCURRENT SENSOR [page 802] addresses the problem of monitoring the current
flowing through a DC load.chapter 32www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 782 ---
ONE-SHOT ADC
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you measure an analogue voltage or current signal at irregular (or infrequent)intervals?
Background
We consider some basic background material in this section.
Measuring voltages
Consider the analogue input from the potentiometer shown in Figure 32.1.
The resulting analogue voltage (in the range, here, of 0–5V) can be used as part of a
user interface, if we have an on- or off-chip analogue-to-digital converter (ADC) avail-able; as we will see, such devices are common.
4ONE-SHOT ADC 757
FIGURE  32.1 Using a potentiometer as part of a user interface50 k pot 0.1 µF
00-5v
To ADC+5v7805
0≤+24v (DC)20°C
15°C2 5 °C
10°C3 0 °C
4. Please note that, although in widespread use, there may be better ways of creating such a user inter-
face: refer to ‘Related patterns and alternative solutions’ (page 762).www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 783 ---
This general approach is more widely applied. For example, consider Figure 32.2.
Here we use three potentiometers (and an appropriate three-channel ADC) to meas-ure angles in a mechanical excavator. By measuring the angles at points A, B and C,we can determine the position (specifically, the depth) of the shovel (X).
Measuring currents
In these simple earlier examples, we illustrated how analogue voltage signals might bea useful source of information in embedded applications. However, particularly inindustrial applications, it can be helpful to be able to measure analogue current signals.
To see why current signals can be useful, consider Figure 32.3.Figure 32.3 shows a sensor which, we assume, is connected to a long stretch of wire
(with resistance R
wire) and, thereby, to the analogue (voltage) input of a microcon-
troller. The sensor, we will assume, measures temperature and generates an output of5V to represent 100°C and 1 V to represent 0°C. We will further assume that only pos-itive temperatures are possible and that, if the sensor or the wiring is broken, thevoltage measured will be 0V , indicating an error.
There are two problems with this arrangement:MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 758
FIGURE  32.2 Using potentiometers to measure angles in a mechanical excavator
[Note: By measuring the angles at points A, B and C, we can determine the position (specifically, the depth) of the shovel (X).]AB
C
X
FIGURE  32.3 The problems with voltage-output sensorsRwire
1–5 Volts X–Y Volts
Sensor Microcontrollerwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 784 ---
1The voltage at the microcontroller will be less – possibly much less – than the volt-
age at the sensor. We will therefore probably need to fine-tune the sensor code totake into account the voltage drop in the wiring.
2The wire resistance (and, hence, the voltage drop) will be temperature dependent,making it very difficult to obtain accurate readings even after fine-tuning.
One good solution to this problem is to digitize the analogue readings in the
sensor and to transmit a digital representation of the voltage signal to the mainmicrocontroller; the techniques discussed in Part F can be used to implement thissolution.
Another solution, which is very common in the process industry, is to use a vary-
ing current (e.g. 4–20 mA) rather than a varying voltage to encode the sensorinformation (Figure 32.4).
The current-source sensor works well, even over long distances, even where the
wiring resistance varies with temperature, since the sensor can adjust its output volt-age, as required, to keep the current at the specified level. Note also that, at themicrocontroller, we may simply convert the current signal back to a voltage signal byusing a fixed resistor.
Solution
We will briefly consider here some of the hardware options that are available to allow
the measurement of analogue voltage or current signals using a microcontroller.
Specifically, we will consider four options:
GUsing a microcontroller with on-chip (voltage-mode) ADC
GUsing an external serial (voltage-mode) ADC
GUsing an external parallel (voltage-mode) ADC
GUsing a current-mode ADC
We present a number of complete software libraries in the examples that follow.
Using a microcontroller with on-chip (voltage-mode) ADC
Many members of the 8051 family contain on-board ADCs. In general, use of an
internal device will result in increased reliability, since both hardware and softwareONE-SHOT ADC 759
FIGURE  32.4 A schematic representation of a current-mode sensorRwire
4–20 mA1–5 Volt
voltage drop
Sensor MicrocontrollerRsensorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 785 ---
complexity will often be lower. In addition, the ‘internal’ solution will usually be
physically smaller and have a lower system cost.
Here are some examples of the available ADC components provided on two
8051 devices.
Infineon c515c
From the Infineon5c515c data sheet:
The c515c includes a high performance / high speed 10-bit A/D-converter (ADC) with 8 chan-
nels. It operates with a successive approximation technique and uses self calibrationmechanisms for reduction and compensation of offset and linearity errors. 
The A/D converter provides the following features:
G8 multiplexed input channels (port 6), which can also be used as digital inputs
G10-bit resolution
GSingle or continuous conversion mode
GInternal or external start-of-conversion trigger capability
GUses successive approximation conversion technique via a capacitor array
GBuilt-in hidden calibration of offset and linearity errors
Analog Devices ADµC812 
From the Analog Devices6ADµC812 data sheet:
The ADC conversion block incorporates a fast, multi-channel, 12-bit, single supply A/D con-verter. This block provides the user with multi-channel mux, track/hold, on-chip reference,calibration features and A/D converter. All components in this block are easily configured via theSFR interface from the core MCU. 
The A/D converter section in this block consists of a conventional successive-approximation
converter based around a capacitor DAC. The converter accepts an analogue input range of 0to +VREF. A high precision, low drift 2.5V reference is provided on-chip. The internal referencemay be overdriven via the external VREF pin. This external reference can be in the range 2.3Vto AVDD. 
Single step or continuous conversion modes can be initiated in software or alternatively by
applying a convert signal to the an external pin. Timer 2 can also be configured to generate arepetitive trigger for ADC conversions. The ADC may also be configured to operate in a DMAMode whereby the ADC block continuously converts and captures samples without any interac-tion from the MCU core. 
The ADC core contains self-calibration and system calibration options to ensure accurate
operation over time and temperature. A voltage output from an On-Chip bandgap referenceproportional to absolute temperature can also be routed through the front-end ADC multi-plexor facilitating a temperature sensor implementation.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 760
5.www.infineon.com
6.www.analog.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 786 ---
Using an external parallel (voltage-mode) ADC
The ‘traditional’ alternative to an on-chip ADC is a parallel ADC. In general, parallel
ADCs have the following strengths and weaknesses:
They can provide fast data transfers. 
They tend to be inexpensive.They require a very simple software framework. They tend to require a large number of port pins. In the case of a 16-bit conver-
sion, the external ADC will require 16 pins for the data transfer, plus between oneand three pins to control the data transfers. 
The wiring complexity can be a source of reliability problems in some environ-
ments.
Examples of the use of a parallel ADC follow.
Using an external serial (voltage-mode) ADC
Many more recent ADCs have a serial interface. In general, serial ADCs have the
following strengths and weaknesses:
They require a small number of port pins (between two and four), regardless
of the ADC resolution.
They require on-chip support for the serial protocol or the use of a suitable
software library.
The data transfer may be slower than a parallel alternative.They can be comparatively expensive.
Two examples of the use of serial ADCs follow.
Using a current-mode ADC
As we discussed in ‘Background’, use of current-based data transmission can be useful
in some circumstances.
A number of current-mode sensor components (e.g. the Burr-Brown7XTR105) and
ADCs (e.g. the Burr-Brown RCV420) are now available.
In addition, CURRENT SENSOR [page 802] discusses current sensing using voltage-
mode ADCs.
Hardware resource implications
Use of the internal ADC will generally mean that at least one input pin is unavailablefor other purposes; use of an external ADC will require the use of larger numbers ofport pins.ONE-SHOT ADC 761
7.www.burr-brown.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 787 ---
Use of the on-chip ADC may also have an impact on the power consumption of
your microcontroller.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of ADCs has no particular safety implications. However, all things being equal, an
application using an internal ADC is likely to prove more reliable than the sameapplication created using an external ADC, largely because the hardware complexityof the ‘internal’ solution will be much less than that of the ‘external’ solution.
Portability
All ADCs vary in their properties: for example, code for one serial ADC will often notwork without alteration on another serial device. However, the required changes aregenerally minor.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
ADC inputs are essential in many applications.
Microcontrollers with ADCs are more expensive than those without such facilities.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
Many microcontrollers now have multiple A/D converter channels available, makingit possible to implement low-cost user inputs, for example for setting temperatures,operating points and so on. 
The main advantage of this type of analogue input is that it directly provides user
feedback: for example, we simply add a scale around the potentiometer control to indi-cate the required temperature. The cost of such an input sensor is frequently muchlower than the corresponding digital (two switch plus display) equivalent (Figure 32.5). 
However, in almost all circumstances the digital solution will provide more precise
control and will not alter with age (as the performance of the potentiometer is likelyto do). In addition, if we wish to alter the temperature of the system under softwarecontrol we can easily, in the case of the digital solution, update the temperaturedisplay, while we cannot generally rotate the potentiometer under software control tomatch the new temperature.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 762
FIGURE  32.5 Two possible user interfaces, one based on an LCD/LED display with switches, the other
based on an analog potentiometerDown Up3000
2000 4000
1000 50001894www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 788 ---
Nonetheless, the analog solution is often adequate, where high precision is not a
requirement. For example, for a room thermostat control, a potentiometer may wellbe appropriate. 
Example: Using an external SPI ADC
This example illustrates the use of an external, serial (SPI) ADC (Listings 32.1 to 32.3):the SPI protocol was described in detail in Chapter 24.
The hardware comprises an Atmel AT89S53 microcontroller and a Maxim
8
Max1110 ADC: these devices are connected as shown in Figure 32.6.ONE-SHOT ADC 763
FIGURE  32.6 Connecting an SPI ADC to an 8051 microcontroller30 pF30 pFRST
XTL1
XTL2
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7 (SCK)
P1.6 (MISO)P1.5 (MOSI)
P1.4(/SS)
P1.3P1.2
P1.1 (T2EX)
P1.0(T2)
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)VCC
AT89553
VSS32
33343536373839
8
7654321
28
272625242322219
19
18
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
VccSCLKDOUTDIN
/CSCH0
CH1CH2CH3CH4CH5CH6CH7 12 MHz10 µF
19
1517
18Vcc (+5V)
10 K
Vcc
AGND
DGND
COM
Vdd
/SHDN
REFIN0.1 µF1 µF
1
234567813
14
9
20
1011Max
1110
8.www.maxim-ic.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 789 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for project SPI_ADC
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ SPI_Core.C -----------------------------------------------// Create sbits for all required chip selects here
sbit SPI_CS = P1^4;  
// NOTE: pins P1.4, P1.5, P1.6 and P1.7 also used - see text/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.1 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (SPI) ADC
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for SPI code library.Reads from MAX1110 / 1111 SPI ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "SPI_Core.h"#include "SPI_1110.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
// In this test program, we define the error code variable here.
tByte Error_code_G = 0;
void main(void)
{tByte Data1 = 0;tByte Data2 = 0;
tWord Data_address = 0;MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 764www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 790 ---
// See text for details 
// SPI Control Register.
// Bit 0 = SPR0// Bit 1 = SPR1 (these two control the clock rate)// Bit 2 = CPHA (transfer format, see p15 of AT89S53 docs)
// Bit 3 = CPOL (clock polarity, 1 = high when idle, 0 = low when idle)
// Bit 4 = MSTR (1 for master, 0 for slave)// Bit 5 = DORD (data order, 1 for LSB first, 0 for MSB first)// Bit 6 = SPE  (enable SPI)// Bit 7 = SPIE (enable SPI interrupt, if ES is also 1)
// To interface with the MAX1110 ADC, we need a clock rate in the
// range 50-500 kHz, so with a 12 MHz oscillator SPR0 and SPR1 are// set at 1 and 0, so SPI speed is Fosc / 64, which is 187.5 kHz// // CPHA and CPOL both need to be zero, see MAX1110 docs// DORD needs to be zero (MSB first)// MSTR, SPE, SPIE need to be one// -> SPCR = 0x52;SPI_Init_AT89S53(0x52);
while (1) 
{// Read ADC byteData2 = SPI_MAX1110_Read_Byte();
// Display data
P2 = 255 - Data2;
// Display error codes (if any)
P3 = 255 - Error_code_G;
Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);
}   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.2 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (SPI) ADCONE-SHOT ADC 765www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 791 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_1110.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple SPI library for Atmel AT89S53
- allows data to be read from MAX1110 / 1111 ADC
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
#include "Port.h"
#include "SPI_Core.h"
#include "SPI_1110.h"#include "TimeoutH.h"
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPI_MAX1110_Read_Byte()Read a byte of data from the ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SPI_MAX1110_Read_Byte(void)
{tByte Data, Data0, Data1;
// 0. Pin /CS is pulled low to select the device
SPI_CS = 0;
// 1. Send a MAX1110 control byte// Bit 7 = 1 (start of control byte)
// Bit 6 = SEL2 - {SEL2, SEL1, SEL0 select the input channel]// Bit 5 = SEL1 - (see Maxim documentation)// Bit 4 = SEL0 // Bit 3 = 1 for unipolar, 0 for bipolar// Bit 2 = 1 for single ended, 0 for differential// Bit 1 = 1 for fully operational, 0 for power-down mode// Bit 0 = 1 for external clock, 0 for internal clockMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 766www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 792 ---
//  
// Control byte 0x8F sets single-ended unipolar mode,// input channel 0 (pin 1)// 0 (pin 1)SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x8F);
// 2. The data requested is shifted out on SO by sending two dummy
// bytesData0 = SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x00);Data1 = SPI_Exchange_Bytes(0x00);
// The data are contained in bits 5-0 of Data0 
// and 7-6 of Data1 - shift these bytes to give a combined byte,Data0 <<= 2;   Data1 >>= 6;Data = (Data0 | Data1);
// 3. We pull the /CS pin high to complete the operation
SPI_CS = 1;
// 4. We return the required data
return Data; // Return SPI data byte}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/ 
Listing 32.3 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (SPI) ADC
Example: Using an external I2C ADC
This example illustrates the use of an external, serial (I2C) ADC (Listings 32.4 to 32.6):
the I2C protocol was described in detail in Chapter 23.
The ADC hardware comprises a Maxim9Max127 ADC: this device is connected to
the microcontroller as shown in Figure 32.7.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for project ADC_M127 (see Chap 32)ONE-SHOT ADC 767
9.www.maxim-ic.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 793 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P2
#endif// ------ I2C_Core.C -----------------------------------------------// The two-wire I2C bus
sbit I2C_SCL = P1^7;sbit I2C_SDA = P1^6;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.4 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (I2C) ADCMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 768
FIGURE  32.7 The Maxim Max127 serial (I2C) ADCVdd
Vdd
N.C.
DGNDSCLA0SDAA2N.C.A1
10987654321
15161718192021222324 N.C.
REF
N.C.
REFadj
CH7CH6CH5CH4CH3CH2
11
1214
13/SHDN
AGNDCH1
CH00VTo microcontroller
‘l2C_SCL’ pin
0V
0V
0VTo microcontroller
‘l2C_SDA’ pin
Max 127Analoginputwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 794 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple test program for I2C (MAX127 ADC) library.Connect a MAX127 to the SDA and SCL pins described 
in the library file (I2C_Core.C).
Terminating resistors not generally required on the bus.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "I2C_m127.h"#include "Delay_T0.h"
extern tByte ADC_G;// In this test program, we define the error code variable here
// (Usually in the scheduler library)tByte Error_code_G = 0;
void main( void )
{while(1) 
{I2C_ADC_MAX127_Read();P1 = ADC_G;P2 = Error_code_G;Hardware_Delay_T0(1000);}   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.5 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (I2C) ADCONE-SHOT ADC 769www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 795 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
I2C_m127.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Code library for MAX127 (I2C) ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
#include "Port.h"
#include "I2C_Core.h"
#include "I2C_m127.h"#include "Delay_t0.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// The ADC value
tByte ADC_G;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The error codes - see scheduler
extern tByte Error_code_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Chip address = 0101xxxW
#define I2C_MAX127_ADDRESS (80) 
// Start bit set
// Normal power mode (not in power-down mode)// Range 0 - 5V#define I2C_MAX127_MODE (0x80)
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------
// The ADC channel (0 - 7)
// *** Value here is required channel value << 4 ***// *** We are using Channel 2 ***static tByte I2C_MAX127_Channel_G = 0x20;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 770www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 796 ---
I2C_ADC_MAX127_Read()
Reads from the I2C 12-bit ADCThe channel used is given by ADC_Channel_GThis version reads only 8-bits (most sig) data
-*-------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void I2C_ADC_MAX127_Read(void)
{I2C_Send_Start(); // Generate I2C START condition
// Send DAC device address (with write access request)
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_MAX127_ADDRESS | I2C_WRITE))    
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_ADC_MAX127;return;}
// Set the ADC mode and channel - see above
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_MAX127_MODE | I2C_MAX127_Channel_G)) 
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_ADC_MAX127;return;}
I2C_Send_Stop(); // Generate STOP conditionI2C_Send_Start(); // Generate START condition (again)// Send MAX127 device address (with READ access request)
if (I2C_Write_Byte(I2C_MAX127_ADDRESS | I2C_READ))  
{Error_code_G = ERROR_I2C_ADC_MAX127;return;}
// Receive first (MS) byte from I2C bus
ADC_G = I2C_Read_Byte();
I2C_Send_Master_Ack(); // Perform a MASTER ACKONE-SHOT ADC 771www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 797 ---
// Here we require temperature only accurate to 1 degree C
// - we discard LS byte (perform a dummy read)I2C_Read_Byte();
I2C_Send_Master_NAck(); // Perform a MASTER NACKI2C_Send_Stop(); // Generate STOP condition
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE --------------------------------------------------*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.6 Part of an example illustrating the use of a serial (I2C) ADC
Example: Using an external parallel ADC
This example illustrates this use of an 8-bit parallel ADC: the Maxim10Max150
(Figure 32.8) (Listings 32.7 to 32.9).
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project 'ADC_m150'
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 772
FIGURE  32.8 Pin connections on a parallel (8-bit) ADC (Max150)Vin
DB0
DB1
DB2DB3
/WR RDY
MODE
/RD
/INTGND
10987654321
11121314151617181920 Vdd
TP/RO
/OFL
DB7
DB6
DB5
DB4
/CS
Vref+
Vref–To microcontroller
‘NOT_WRITE’ pin
+5V
Max 150To microcontroller
‘NOT_INT’ pinTo microcontroller
data port
To microcontroller
‘NOT_RD’ pinAnalogue
input
+5V0V
0VTo microcontroller
data port
10.www.maxim-ic.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 798 ---
// ------ ADC_M150.C ----------------------------------------
// Interface to the MAX150 parallel ADCsbit ADC_MAX150_NOT_Read_pin  = P1^0;sbit ADC_MAX150_NOT_Write_pin = P1^1;sbit ADC_MAX150_NOT_Int_pin   = P1^2;
#define ADC_MAX150_port P2// ------ Bargraph.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]// The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if requiredsbit Pin0 = P2^0;sbit Pin1 = P2^1;sbit Pin2 = P2^2;sbit Pin3 = P2^3;sbit Pin4 = P2^4;sbit Pin5 = P2^5;sbit Pin6 = P2^6;sbit Pin7 = P2^7;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.7 Part of an example illustrating the use of a parallel (8-bit) ADC
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for ADC -> Bargraph display
Required linker options (see text for details):
OVERLAY 
(main ~ (AD_Get_Sample,Bargraph_Update), sch_dispatch_tasks ! (AD_Get_Sample,Bargraph_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h"#include "ADC_m150.h"#include "BarGraph.h"ONE-SHOT ADC 773www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 799 ---
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{SCH_Init_T2(); // Set up the schedulerADC_MAX150_Init(); // Prepare the ADCBARGRAPH_Init(); // Prepare a bargraph-type display (P4)
// Read the ADC regularly  
SCH_Add_Task(ADC_MAX150_Get_Sample, 10, 1000);
// Simply display the count here (bargraph display)
SCH_Add_Task(BARGRAPH_Update, 12, 1000);
// All tasks added: start running the scheduler
SCH_Start();   
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.8 Part of an example illustrating the use of a parallel (8-bit) ADC
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ADC_m150.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple, single-channel, 8-bit A-D (input) library for 8051 family
- uses MAX150 8-bit parallel ADC.
See Chapter 32 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Bargraph.h"// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 774www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 800 ---
// Stores the most recent ADC reading
tByte Analog_G;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ADC_MAX150_Init()Set up the MAX150 ADC.  Using WR-RD mode (see data sheet)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void ADC_MAX150_Init(void)
{// Set 'NOT read' pin highADC_MAX150_NOT_Read_pin = 1;
// Set 'NOT write' pin high
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Write_pin = 1;
// Prepare 'NOT Int' pin for reading
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Int_pin   = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ADC_MAX150_Get_Sample()Get a single data sample (8 bits) from the ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void ADC_MAX150_Get_Sample(void)
{tWord Time_out_loop = 1;
// Start conversion by pulling 'NOT Write' low
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Write_pin = 0;
// Take sample from A-D (with simple loop time-out)
while ((ADC_MAX150_NOT_Int_pin == 1) && (Time_out_loop != 0));
{Time_out_loop++;  // Disable for use in dScope...}
if (!Time_out_loop)
{// Timed outError_code_G =  ONE-SHOT ADC 775www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 801 ---
Analog_G = 0;
}
else 
{     // Set port to 'read' modeADC_MAX150_port = 0xFF;  
// Set 'NOT read' pin low
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Read_pin = 0;
// ADC result is now available
Analog_G = ADC_MAX150_port; 
// Set 'NOT read' pin high
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Read_pin = 1;}
// Pull 'NOT Write' high
ADC_MAX150_NOT_Write_pin = 1;} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.9 Part of an example illustrating the use of a parallel (8-bit) ADC
Example: Using the c515c internal ADC 
See SEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782] for a complete code library using the on-chip ADC in
the Infineon c515c.
Further reading
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 776www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 802 ---
ADC PRE -AMP
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you convert an analogue voltage signal into a range suitable for subsequentanalogue-to-digital conversion?
Background
In a 5V system, an ADC will typically encode a range of analogue signals, from 0V to
approximately 5V. If we have an analogue signal in the range 0–5 mV , we need toamplify this voltage prior to use of the ADC or the digital signal will be a very poorrepresentation of the analogue original.
This pattern describes some suitable circuits. Note that this pattern is hardware
based; no software is required.
Solution
An operational amplifier provides the basis of a widely used solution to the problemof scaling analogue signals and will be used here. 
A wide range of operational amplifiers are available, including the ‘classic’ 741 or
411 chips and more recent devices such as the Microchip
11MCP601.
We consider two basic operations: amplification and level shifting
Voltage amplification
All operational amplifiers are used in the same way when implementing a simplevoltage amplifier. Figure 32.9 illustrates the approach.
The gain of this circuit, G, is given by:
Vout R 1 + R2 R2G=           =                 = 1 + Vin R 1 R1
This is very simply applied, as we illustrate in the following example.
Note that for precise gains, you need to use good-quality resistors, with a precision
of 1%: a precision of 5% will not generally be adequate.ADC PRE-AMP 777
11.www.microchip.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 803 ---
Level shifting
Suppose we wish to sample the speech signal shown in Figure 32.10.
The signal has a maximum value of around 50 mV, so will require amplification
before it is sampled. In addition, however, the signal has a mean value of approxi-mately 0V; it therefore must also be ‘level shifted’ to bring it into the positive voltagerange that we are able to analyze.
Figure 32.11 illustrates an op-amp circuit that may be used for level shifting.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 778
FIGURE  32.9 Amplifying a voltage signal using an op-amp+
–Op-amp
R1R2Vin
Vout
FIGURE  32.10 A speech signal with a mean value of approximately 0V
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50mV
Time
FIGURE  32.11 A simple op-amp level-shifting circuit+
–Op-ampR2
Vin
Vout
VrefR1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 804 ---
The output of this circuit is given by:
R2Vout = Vref–        VinR1 
Another alternative level-shifting circuit is shown in Figure 32.12.
The output of this circuit is given by:
R4 R2Vout =         V1 –       VinR3 R1
Figure 32.12 is a particularly flexible circuit.
Hardware resource implications
Use of this pattern has no implications for the hardware resources (e.g. CPU time or
memory) on the microcontroller itself. Clearly, however, the op-amp and associatedresistors will have an associated cost. 
In addition, some op-amp circuits may require the presence of both positive
and negative supply rails (e.g. +15V , –15V). This can add to the complexity ofthe power supply design and make it difficult (or more expensive) to use batterysupplies. Increasing, ‘single-supply’ op-amps are available and can often be used inamplifier applications.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability or safety implications.
Portability
This hardware-only pattern can be used with any microcontroller.ADC PRE-AMP 779
FIGURE  32.12 An alternative op-amp level-shifting circuit+
–Op-amp
R4R3Vin
VoutR2
R1
V1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 805 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Simple and effective. 
May require use of a two-rail power supply.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
—
Example: An amplifier with a gain of 1,000
Suppose we have a sensor with a maximum 5mV output and we require a 5V input to
our ADC, we need a gain of 1,000. 
We can achieve this result (approximately) by applying the equation on page 779.
Here we choose R2 and R1 to have a ratio of 1,000; here, values of, say, R1 = 1 k Ωand
R2 = 1M Ω(1% tolerance) will be fine.
Example: A microphone pre-amplifier
Figure 32.13 (adapted from an Analog Devices data sheet) shows an application of
voltage amplifier to create a pre-amp for an electret microphone: the amplifier stagehas a gain of approximately 10. 
Note that the AD8517 is a single-supply op-amp.R1 is used to bias an electret microphone and C1 blocks DC voltage from the
amplifier. The magnitude of the gain of the amplifier is approximately R3/R2 when
R2 = 10 ×R1. VREF should be equal to 1/2 1.8 V for maximum voltage swing.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 780
FIGURE  32.13 Creating a microphone pre-amp+
–AD8517
100K100KTo ADC input100K
10K
VccVcc (1.8 – 5V)
2.2K
0.1 µF
Electret
micwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 806 ---
Further reading
Elgar, P. (1998) Sensors for Measurement and Control , Longman, London.
Franco, S. (1998) Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated Circuits , 2nd
edn, McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA.ADC PRE-AMP 781www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 807 ---
SEQUENTIAL ADC
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you record a sequence of analog samples?
Background
In the pattern ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757], we were concerned with the use of ana-
logue signals to address questions such as:
GWhat central-heating temperature does the user require?
GWhat is the current angle of the crane?
GWhat is the humidity level in Greenhouse 3?
In the present pattern, we are concerned with the recording of sequences of ana-
logue samples, in order to address questions such as:
GHow quickly is the car accelerating?
GHow fast is the plane turning?
GWhat is the frequency of this sound?
For example, suppose that we are required to design a system to be used by an
environmental organization to record and automatically classify the songs of whalesrecorded (underwater) in the Antarctic. Our embedded system will be encased inplastic and attached to a floating buoy. It will run on batteries for a two-year periodand will be required to send a radio broadcast to base every time it detects a whale inthe vicinity. 
In this case we will need an underwater pressure transducer (hydrophone) to con-
vert the fluctuations in water pressure produced by the whale song into a voltagevalue that can be processed by an ADC. 
The output of the ADC will be a sequence of numbers (Figure 32.14). Individually,
these numbers (e.g. ‘0.89’) have no meaning; it is the sequence of numbers that
allows us to determine, for example, the frequency components that make up thewhale song.
In this pattern, we are concerned with the recording of sequences of analogue sig-
nals, at a fixed sampling frequency: for example, the whale song might be sampled atMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 782www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 808 ---
a rate of 50 kHz. To record such a sequence, we will build on the techniques discussed
in ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757]. However, as we will discuss in ‘Solution’, the recording
of sequences of signals introduces several new challenges for the developer.
Solution
There are several key design stages to be carried out implementing SEQUENTIAL ADC :
1You need to determine the required sample rate
2You may need to remove any high-frequency components from the input signal
3You need to determine the required bit rate
4You need to employ an appropriate software architecture
5You need to select an appropriate ADC
We now deal with each of these points in turn.
Determining the required sample rate
As discussed in ‘Background’, we are concerned in this pattern with the recording of
sequences of analogue signals, at a fixed sampling frequency. The first importantdesign decision involves determining the required sample frequency.SEQUENTIAL ADC 783
FIGURE  32.14 Performing analog-to-digital conversion on a sample of whale song
[(a) The original (analog) sample, recorded as a continuously varying voltage from an underwater microphone. (b) The sampled (q uan-
tized) version of the same signal. (c) The digital representation of the whale song to be stored on the computer.]Signal level
Time
(a)Signal level
Time
(b)Samples {0.46, 0.42, 0.17, 0.04,
0.00, 0.13, 0.21, 0.53,0.84, 0.89, 1.00, 1.00,0.63, 0.42, 0.42, 0.21,0.00, 0.11, 0.00, 0.42,0.42, 0.23, 0.46, 0.42,0.48, 0.52, 0.54, 0.57}
(c)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 809 ---
Monitoring and signal-processing applications
Suppose that we wish to create a system to perform speech recognition. From the
speech waveform alone (for example, the time-varying voltage waveform from amicrophone), we aim to recognize the words spoken (Figure 32.15). 
To determine the sample rate for this application, we need to know the bandwidth
of the signal we are trying to sample. We then need to sample at a frequency of atleast twice this bandwidth (a frequency known as the Nyquist frequency).
Remember that the bandwidth refers, simply, to the frequency of the highest fre-
quency component in the signal we wish to measure. For example, Figure 32.16shows an idealized example: a pure tone (sine wave) of frequency F
sine. In this case,
the signal bandwidth is the same as the tone frequency ( Fsine) and we need to sample
at twice this frequency to represent the signal correctly.
More commonly, signals we wish to work with will have broadband characteristics
(Figure 32.17).MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 784
FIGURE  32.15 A simple speech recognition (classification) systemRecognize
words“Hello”
FIGURE  32.16 The representation of a pure tone in the frequency domain02004006008001000Signal level
FsineFrequency
FIGURE  32.17 The representation of a broadband signal in the frequency domain02004006008001000Signal level
FbFrequencywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 810 ---
In this case, the bandwidth refers to the maximum signal frequency; here, Fb.
In general, we may need to use specialized hardware, such as a spectrum analyzer,
to determine the maximum frequency components in any signal we wish to sample.If we use such hardware then, in the case of the speech signal, we will find that themaximum frequency components have a frequency of around 20 kHz, implying thatwe need to sample at around 40 kHz (Figure 32.18).
Note that it is not always possible, or cost-effective, to sample at (or above) the
highest signal frequency: see ‘Removing high-frequency components’ (below) for adiscussion of techniques that can be used to deal with this issue.
Control applications
If we wish to carry out some of the following operations:
GSpeech recognition
GRecording ECGs
GRecording auditory-evoked responses
GVibration monitoring
then we can determine the maximum frequency components in the signal using an
appropriate spectrum analyzer, and select the sample rate accordingly.
However, suppose we wish to develop a digital control application of the form
illustrated in Figure 32.19.
This type of application also involves regular sampling, in this case of the motor
speed. For this type of control application, different techniques are required to deter-mine the required sampling rate; we delay consideration of these techniques untilChapter 35.
Removing high-frequency components
If you are sampling a signal at regular frequency (F Hz), you will generally need toinclude a filter in your system to remove all frequencies above F/2 Hz, to avoid aphenomenon known as aliasing.
Refer to 
A-A FILTER [page 794] for further details.SEQUENTIAL ADC 785
FIGURE  32.18 The representation of a broadband signal (bandwidth 20 kHz) in the frequency domain
02004006008001000Signal level
20 kHzFrequencywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 811 ---
Determining the required bit rate
The process of analogue-to-digital conversion is never perfect, since we are represent-
ing a continuous analogue signal with a digital representation that has only a limitednumber of possible values (Figure 32.20).
For example, if we were to use a 3-bit ADC, then we would have only eight possible
signal levels (2
3) possible signal levels to represent our analogue signal. The error
introduced by the digitization process is half the quantization level; thus, for our 3-bitADC, this error would be equal to ±1/16 of the available analogue range. The result-ing errors, over a sequence of samples, can be viewed as a form of quantization noise.
In most practical cases, use of a 12-bit ADC will provide adequate performance and
even the most sophisticated speech-processing systems rarely use more than 16 bits.
Formal techniques for determining the required bit rate for a general sampled-data
application are complex and beyond the scope of the present text: refer to Lynn andFuerst (1998) for an introduction to this topic and to Oppenheim et al. (1999) for
more detailed coverage.
Software architecture
The main impact that the use of SEQUENTIAL ADC has on the software architecture is
the need to allow regular and frequent samples to be made.
Where sample rates of up to 1 kHz are required, this is rarely a problem. Obtaining
a sample from the ADC typically requires 100 ns, and the scheduled architectureswe have presented throughout this book can support the creation of suitable data-acquisition tasks with unduly loading the system.
Where sample rates in excess of 1 kHz are required, use of a fast 8051 device will
generally be required. For example, the Dallas high-speed and ultra-high-speed familyMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 786
FIGURE  32.19 High-level design for a control applicationRadar
speed
controllerDC Motor
interface (DAC)New speed
settingsSpeed
sensorCurrent speed
of rotation
User interface
(ADC)Required speed
of rotationCurrent speed
of rotationwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 812 ---
of devices will – as we demonstrated in Chapter 14 – allow the use of short tick inter-
vals without unduly loading the CPU. However, even where sample rates of 10 kHzand above can be supported, this has important implications for other aspects of thedesign and, specifically, on the task durations. Use of 
HYBRID SCHEDULER [page 289]
can be particularly valuable in these circumstances, since this allows the data sam-pling to be configured as a pre-emptive task.
Selecting an appropriate ADC
We discussed the range of possible ADCs in the pattern ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757].
Refer to this pattern for further information on this topic.
Note that, to a greater extent than one-shot applications, sequential ADC readings
rely on rapid analogue-to-digital conversion and it is important to ensure that anyADC you select has a rapid conversion time. This can make ‘flash’ ADCs more appro-priate than successive-approximation ADCs, for example, in these circumstances.SEQUENTIAL ADC 787
FIGURE  32.20 A pure tone in both its original analog form (top) and after quantization (bottom)10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4–6–8
–10Time10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4–6–8
–10Timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 813 ---
Hardware resource implications
Use of the internal ADC will generally mean that at least one input pin is unavailable
for other purposes.
Use of the ADC may also have an impact on the power consumption of your
microcontroller.
Reliability and safety implications
All things being equal, an application using an internal ADC is likely to prove morereliable than the same application created using an external ADC, largely becausethe hardware complexity of the ‘internal’ solution will be much less than that of the‘external’ solution.
More specifically, use of an ADC with a long conversion time may introduce delays
that will impact on the general performance of signal-processing applications andwhich may impact on the stability of control applications. Make sure the speed of theADC is an appropriate match for your intended application.
Portability
All ADCs vary in their properties: for example, code for one serial ADC will not gener-ally work without alteration on another serial device. However, the required changesare generally minor.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Use of sequential ADC inputs is essential in many applications.
The need to sample data frequently will have an significant impact on the system
architecture.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See the rest of this chapter for related patterns and alternative solutions.
Example: Using the c515c internal ADC 
This small library illustrates how we an make analogue readings, as required, usingthe on-chip ADC in an Infineon c515c microcontroller (Listings 32.10 to 32.12 (Seealso Figure 32.21)).
The ADC is initialized. Each time a reading is required, we start the ADC conver-
sion and wait (with timeout, of course) for the conversion to complete.
The duration of the individual ADC tasks depends on the speed of the internal
ADC. MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 788www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 814 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project ADC_BAR
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ ADC_515c.C -----------------------------------------------// Reads from ADC channel 0 (Pin 6.0)// ------ Bargraph.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to these pins, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]// The 8 port pins may be distributed over several ports if requiredsbit Pin0 = P4^0;sbit Pin1 = P4^1;sbit Pin2 = P4^2;sbit Pin3 = P4^3;sbit Pin4 = P4^4;sbit Pin5 = P4^5;sbit Pin6 = P4^6;sbit Pin7 = P4^7;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.10 Part of an example illustrating the use of the internal ADC in an 
Infineon c515c microcontroller
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demo program for ADC -> Bargraph display
Required linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):
OVERLAY 
(main ~ (AD_Get_Sample,Bargraph_Update), sch_dispatch_tasks ! (AD_Get_Sample,Bargraph_Update))SEQUENTIAL ADC 789www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 815 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_10i.h"#include "ADC_515c.h"#include "BarGraph.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{SCH_Init_T2();      // Set up the schedulerAD_Init();          // Prepare the ADCBARGRAPH_Init();    // Prepare a bargraph-type display (P4)
// Read the ADC regularly  
SCH_Add_Task(AD_Get_Sample, 10, 1000);
// Simply display the count here (bargraph display)
SCH_Add_Task(BARGRAPH_Update, 12, 1000);
// All tasks added: start running the scheduler
SCH_Start();   
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.11 Part of an example using the internal ADC in an Infineon c515c
microcontroller
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ADC_515c.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple, single-channel, 8-bit A-D (input) library for C515c
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
#include "Bargraph.h"MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 790www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 816 ---
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// Stores the most recent ADC readingtByte Analog_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
AD_Init()Set up the A-D converter.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void AD_Init(void)
{// Select internally-triggered single conversion// Reading from P6.0 (single channel)ADEX = 0;  // Internal A/D triggerADM = 0;   // Single conversion  MX2 = MX1 = MX0 = 0;  // Read from Channel 0 (Pin 6.0)
// Leave ADCON1 at reset value: prescalar is /4  
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
AD_Get_Sample()Get a single data sample (8 bits) from the (10-bit) ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void AD_Get_Sample(void)
{tWord Time_out_loop = 1;
// Take sample from A-D
// Write (value not important) to ADDATL to start conversionADDATL = 0x01; 
// Take sample from A-D (with simple loop time-out)
while ((BSY == 1) && (Time_out_loop != 0));
{
//    Time_out_loop++;  // Disable for use in dScope...
}
if (!Time_out_loop)
{Analog_G = 0;}
else SEQUENTIAL ADC 791www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 817 ---
{     
// 10-bit A-D result is now availableAnalog_G = ADDATH;  // Read only 8 most significant 8-bits of A-D}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 32.12 Part of an example using the internal ADC in an Infineon c515c
microcontrollerMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 792
FIGURE  32.21 Output (in the Keil hardware simulator) from the application described in Listings 32.10
to 32.12
[Note: This is the output from the hardware simulator in Keil C51 v5.5; at the time of writing, the Infineon range is not fully supp orted in
Keil C51 v6.1 (included with this book). Refer to the Keil WWW site12for possible product updates.]
12.www.keil.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 818 ---
Further reading
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.
Oppenheim, A.V., Schafer, R.W. and Buck, J.R. (1999) Discrete-time Signal Processing ,
Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Smith, S.W. (1999) The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing , 2nd
edn, California Technical Publishing. [Available electronically at www.DSPguide.com]SEQUENTIAL ADC 793www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 819 ---
A-A FILTER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you remove high-frequency components from a signal prior to digitization?
Background
As we discussed in SEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782], the sample rate in a sampled-data
system must satisfy the Nyquist criterion; that is, sample rate (in Hz) must be at leasttwice the highest frequency (in Hz) that you wish to record or analyze. Therefore, if,for example, we wish to record speech, for a speech-recognition application to beused in a factory, we may decide a 5kHz bandwidth will be adequate and that we willtherefore use a 10 kHz sample rate (Figure 32.22).
However, there remains a problem. In the factory environment, there will be fre-
quencies above our 5 kHz limit. Speech signals alone extend up to 20 kHz; otherenvironmental sounds may extend even higher. All frequencies within the range ofour microphone will be sampled at 5 kHz, giving rise to an effect known as aliasing.
To see what aliasing means in this context, first consider Figure 32.23. This figure
illustrates a signal (a pure tone) sampled at a rate that satisfies the Nyquist criterion.
Figure 32.24 illustrates the impact of aliasing. In this figure, the solid line is a
high-frequency signal (well above the Nyquist limit) which, we will assume, has beensampled. The dotted line shows how this high-frequency signal will be representedafter sampling. What the figure illustrates is that, if we attempt to sample a high-fre-quency signal (that is, one with a frequency greater than half the sample rate), theresulting digital representation will simply not be correct.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 794
FIGURE  32.22 Performing speech recognitionADC
(10 kHz)
Pre-amp (Max frequency 5 kHz)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 820 ---
The only way to solve the aliasing problem is by using an anti-aliasing filter
before sampling the data. The anti-aliasing filter will take the form of a low-pass filter
(Figure 32.25). A-A FILTER 795
FIGURE  32.23 A sampled pure-tone signal1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1Time
FIGURE  32.24 The impact of aliasing1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1TimeAmplitude
It is vital to appreciate that, as far as sampled-data signal is concerned, both the low-
frequency signal (sampled in Figure 32.23) and the high-frequency signal (sampled inFigure 32.24) have exactly the same representation; it is impossible to distinguish these
two signals after sampling, and no form of post-processing can reverse this 
effect .
FIGURE  32.25 An idealized low-pass filter1.0Signal gain
FrequencyCutoff frequencywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 821 ---
Very broadly, filters can be thought of as devices that measure the signal frequen-
cies present in the input and alter the amounts of those frequencies present at theoutput. The ranges of input frequencies which the filter amplifies (or at least does notattenuate) are known as the pass bands while the ranges that the filter suppresses arecalled the stop bands. In a low-pass filter (such as that shown in Figure 32.25), thepass band covers a lower frequency range than the stop band.
If we include an anti-aliasing filter, our complete speech-acquisition system will
then take the form shown in Figure 32.26.
Solution
We discussed the need for anti-aliasing (A-A) filters in ‘Background’. In theory, designand use of such a filter is very straightforward, for we simply require a good-qualitylow-pass filter with a cutoff frequency that corresponds to the maximum frequencywe wish to sample; that is, it will be, at most, half of the sample rate. 
In practice, the idealized filter characteristics illustrated in Figure 32.25 cannot be
achieved and the filter in Figure 32.27 is more representative of real filters.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 796
FIGURE  32.26 Adding an anti-aliasing filter to the speech-recognition systemADC
(10 kHz)
Pre-amp (Max frequency 5 kHz) A-A filter (5 kHz)
FIGURE  32.27 A more realistic low-pass filter characteristic
[Note: while this figure provides a more realistic representation of the filter characteristics at the boundary between the ‘pass’ a nd ‘stop’
bands, it is still idealized.]1.0Signal gain
FrequencyCutoff frequencywww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 822 ---
As a general rule, the closer that a particular filter design comes to matching the ideal
filter shown in Figure 32.25, the more complex and more expensive the filter becomes.
We consider a range of possible A-A filters in this section.
Simple op-amp filters
In ADC PRE -AMP [page 777] we considered the pre-processing of analogue signals for
the purposes of signal amplification and level shifting. We can build on this approach,to provide a filtering characteristic. Figure 32.28 illustrates the basic approach.
The performance of this filter is shown, schematically, in Figure 32.29.From Figure 32.29, F1 (Hertz) is calculated from C (in Farads) and R (Ohms)
as follows:
1F1 = 2πCR
2
The gain in the low-frequency pass band is given by:
R2
R1A-A FILTER 797
FIGURE  32.28 Low-pass op-amp filter with gain+
–Op amp
R1R2Vin
Vout
C
FIGURE  32.29 The idealized characteristics of the filter shown in Figure 32.25Signal gain
FrequencyF1R2
R1www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 823 ---
More advanced op-amp based designs
To obtain improved performance from op-amp based filters, more complex designs
with multiple stages are required. The design of such filters is beyond the scope ofthis book.
Note, however, that various filter-design packages are available which can allow
you to create suitable filters. For example, Microchip distribute a free filter-designpackage – FilterLab – available from their WWW site
13– which may be used to create
appropriate designs (Figure 32.30).
Switched-capacitor filter ICs
A number of switched-capacitor filters are available; these are widely used in A-Aapplications. The performance of such filters is much higher than that which can beobtained from the single op-amp design given earlier; advanced op-amp designs cancompete with these filters, but such designs (typically requiring more than 10 op-amps) tend to be bulky and must be designed and constructed with care.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 798
FIGURE  32.30 Designing a good-quality A-A filter using the FilterLab package from Microchip.
(Reproduced courtesy of Arizona Microchip Technology Ltd)
13.www.microchip.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 824 ---
Switched-capacitor filters are driven by an external clock at, typically, 100 times
the cutoff frequency. Thus, for a 10 kHz cutoff frequency, we need to drive the clockwith a 1 MHz clock. This is easy to achieve with an 8051-based design: see 
HARDWARE
PRM [page 742] for a discussion of techniques which may be used to generate clock
frequencies in this range with little or no software overhead.
Note that using the microcontroller to control the clock rate, and hence cutoff
frequency, of the filter means that we can change the cutoff frequency by alteringthe clock rate. This is useful if you are creating an application that needs to vary thesample rate.
The chief drawback with switched-capacitor designs is that the clock introduces
noise in the filtered signal. For high-quality applications, the switched-capacitor filterwill typically be used in conjunction with an op-amp filter (precisely as discussed inSection ‘Simple op-amp filters’) to remove the switching noise.
Various switched-capacitor products are available. For example, Linear
Technology
14make the widely used ‘1064’ range of switched-capacitor filters, aimed
at A-A applications. The Maxim15Max7408 (and similar devices) are a useful alterna-
tive. Note that the Maxim chips tend to be designed for single-rail supplies, while theLT devices generally require both positive and negative supply rails. Please consult themanufacturer’s data sheets for these devices for further details.
Continuous-time filter ICs
A limited number of continuous-time filter ICs also exist; these are not clock drivenand therefore do not require additional filters to remove the clock noise. Two exam-ples are the Maxim Max270 and Maxim Max275.
Hardware resource implications
Use of this pattern has no implications for the hardware resources (e.g. CPU time ormemory) on the microcontroller itself. Clearly, however, the op-amp and associatedresistors will have an associated cost. 
In addition, some op-amp circuits may require the presence of both positive
and negative supply rails (e.g. +15V , –15V). This can add to the complexity ofthe power supply design and make it difficult (or more expensive) to use batterysupplies. Increasing, ‘single-supply’ op-amps are available and can often be used inamplifier applications.
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability or safety implications.A-A FILTER 799
14.www.linear-tech.com
15.www.maxim-ic.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 825 ---
Portability
This hardware-only pattern can be used with any microcontroller.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Use of A-A F ILTER can greatly improve the performance of many systems.
Adding such a filter increases the product cost.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
Good-quality A-A filters can add significantly to the cost of an embedded application.
Sometimes it is possible to reduce the need for A-A filters altogether or at least tomanage with simple op-amp filters, without reducing the signal quality. This is possi-ble if we over-sample the signal.
Consider our speech-recognition system (introduced in ‘Background’) again. This
system required data at 10 kHz sample rate, in order to analyze speech sounds at upto 5 kHz. However, we assumed that other sounds in the vicinity would extend up toa frequency of at least 20 kHz and that the frequencies above 5 kHz would need to beremoved by a good-quality A-A filter.
Suppose, however, that we carry out the following:
GFilter the signal using a low-quality, 5 kHz, analogue A-A filter
GSample at 40 kHz (thereby correctly sampling all frequencies up to 20 kHz)
GDigitally low-pass filter the 40 kHz signal, in software, to remove frequencies
above 5 kHz
GDiscard three out of every four samples (a process referred to as decimation), toprovide the 10 kHz data that we require
This process results in a high-quality signal, without the need to invest in an
expensive analogue A-A filter: it is for these reasons that almost all manufacturers ofCD players use over-sampling (typically 4x) to reduce the cost of their products with-out sacrificing quality.
Performing the required digital filtering operating is straightforward (e.g. see Lynn
and Fuerst, 1998). The main drawback with this approach is that we require highsample rates; this may, in turn, necessitate the use of a 
HYBRID SCHEDULER [page 333].
Example: Applying an A-A filter in a speech-recognition system
Consider the speech-recognition example discussed earlier in this pattern and sum-marized in Figure 32.31.
Figure 32.32 shows a possible design for a suitable A-A filter, created using the
Microchip FilterLab software.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 800www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 826 ---
Further reading
Elgar, P. (1998) Sensors for Measurement and Control , Longman, London.
Franco, S. (1998) Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated Circuits , 2nd
edn, McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA.
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.A-A FILTER 801
FIGURE  32.31 The speech-recognition system revisitedADC
(10 kHz)
Pre-amp (Max frequency 5 kHz) A-A filter (5 kHz)
FIGURE  32.32 An anti-aliasing filter suitable for use with the speech-recognition example+
–Op-amp21.4K
0.0022 µF6.51K0.0033 µF
Vin +
–Op-amp16.3K
0.0022 µF4.15K0.0068 µF
+
–Op-amp5.80K
0.0022 µF1.89K0.0047 µF
Voutwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 827 ---
CURRENT SENSOR
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you monitor the current flowing through a DC load?
Background
Despite the name, CURRENT SENSOR involves the measurement of analogue voltage:
see ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757] and SEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782] for relevant back-
ground information.
Solution
We consider solutions to the problem of current sensing in this section.
Using current-sense resistors
The theoretical basis of traditional current-sensing techniques is very straightforward.
Suppose, for example, we wish to monitor the current flowing through the loadshown in Figure 32.33.
To measure this current, we can place a resistor in series with the load and measure
the voltage drop across the resistor (Figure 32.34).
The current through the load can then simply be determined, from Ohm’s law,
as follows:
V
loadIload= 
RloadMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 802
FIGURE  32.33 The problem: we wish to measure the current flowing through this loadLoad IloadVccwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 828 ---
Any resistor may be used, but in most cases a component with a very small resist-
ance is best: such devices are specially produced for current sensing. Typical valuesused will be less than 1 Ohm. 
Note that we need to have a sufficiently large voltage across the sensor resistor to
enable us to monitor the voltage using an ADC connected to the microcontroller. Toallow for reliable monitoring, you will generally need to have a voltage drop acrossthe resistor of around 0.1V. Any less than this and you run the risk of supply fluctua-tions or EMI interfering with your measurements.
Note also that you must ensure that the sensor resistor is of an appropriate power
rating. The required power rating, in Watts, can be determined as follows:
Presistor= Rsensor(Iload)2
Thus, with a 0.5 Ohm resistor and a 3A load, the required power rating will be 4.5W.Current-sensing resistors are available in ratings of 50W and above. However, the
stated power ratings often assume the use of a heat sink connected to the resistor. Ifyou do not use such a heat sink, then choose a resistor with at least double the calcu-lated power rating.
A resistor-free alternative
In microcontroller-based systems using MOSFETs or BJTs for switching loads, we canoften carry out current sensing without the use of a separate current-sense resistor. 
For example, consider Figure 32.35.CURRENT SENSOR 803
FIGURE  32.34 Using a resistor as a ‘current to voltage converter’ in a current-sense applicationLoad IloadVcc
VsensorRsensor
To understand why small resistors are required, suppose that we have a 12V load
(connected to a 12V supply), with a current requirement of 1A: this is a typicalrequirement for many small bulbs or DC motors. If we add a 10 Ohm resistor in serieswith this load, the voltage drop across the resistor (again determined from Ohm’s law,V = IR), will be 10V. If we use a resistor of 0.2 Ohms, the voltage drop will be reducedto 0.2V: this is acceptable in most situations.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 829 ---
With the BJT in saturation, the voltage drop across the emitter-collector terminals
will be about 1V. We can therefore determine whether the bulb has blown by measur-ing the voltage at the emitter (relative to ground): if the voltage is ~1V , the bulb is lit.Note that we cannot reliably determine the level of the load current using thisapproach: we can only tell whether the load is being driven (or not).
MOSFETs provide a similar solution: see, for example, Figure 32.36.In this circuit, if the MOSFET has an ‘on’ resistance of R
on, then the voltage at the
MOSFET drain pin, when the load is driven, is given (again using Ohm’s law) by:
VDrain= IloadRon
For the IRF540N (for example), Ronis 0.055 Ω, so that – at a typical load current of
around 2A – we have a voltage of ~0.1V at the drain pin, when the load is beingdriven. This may be readily measured even with an 8-bit ADC.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 804
FIGURE  32.35 Current sensing without a resistorBE
C5.5V, 0.5A lamp
To microcomputer pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vload
ZTX751 (pnp)To ADC input
(Current sense)
FIGURE  32.36 Current sensing without a resistorLoad
D
SG To microcomputer output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )Vload
To ADC input
(Current sense)Rload
IRF540N+12V
5K
74×06www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 830 ---
Hardware resource implications
Use of this pattern generally requires the use of an on-chip or external ADC or
comparator circuit.
Reliability and safety implications
Careful use of this technique can improve reliability and safety by allowing changesin the condition of a load (e.g., blown bulb, stalled DC motor) to be detected.
Portability
This hardware-only pattern is highly portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Can improve reliability and safety.
Requires use of an ADC or similar hardware.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757] for alternative current-sense solutions.
Example: Detecting a blown bulb
As part of a security system, a 12V , 20W bulb (in fact, a car headlight bulb) is to be
controlled by a microcontroller-based system. The basic arrangement is illustrated inFigure 32.37.CURRENT SENSOR 805
FIGURE  32.37 Detecting a blown bulbTo microcomputer pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp )To ADC input
(Current sense)
IRF540N5K
74×06+12V
12V, 20W lamp
Thermistor, Rt
(EPCOS B57237S229M)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 831 ---
With the bulb blown, the voltage is 0; with the bulb lit, a voltage of >= 0.1V can
be measured.
Further reading
—MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 806www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 832 ---
Pulse-width modulation
Introduction
Wait until it gets dark. Go to a room in your office or home where there is an ordi-
nary (filament) light bulb. Switch the light on and off as rapidly as you can. The roomwill be dimly lit, with a flickering light. Pulse-width modulation (PWM) does exactlythe same thing, at a much higher frequency. More specifically, PWM allows us to con-trol (for example) the brightness of the light – without visible flickering – byswitching the light on and off at a particular duty cycle.
PWM is an efficient basis for the control of high-power loads and is particularly
widely used in applications such as DC (and AC) motor speed control.
There are two practical approaches to PWM signal generation in a time-triggered
application:
GSeveral 8051-family microcontrollers provide hardware support for PWM on chip.This is generally easy to use. Where on-chip support is not available, specialistexternal hardware can provide cost-effective, high-frequency PWM switching.
GPWM outputs can be generated easily, at low frequencies, using software-onlytechniques.
These approaches are considered in the patterns 
HARDWARE PWM [page 808] and
SOFTWARE PWM [page 831]. We also consider the post-processing that may be
required to filter PWM-based signals, through the pattern PWM SMOOTHER [page 818]
and creation of a high-frequency PWM output without using specialized hardware inthe pattern 3-
LEVEL PWM [page 822].chapter 33www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 833 ---
HARDWARE PWM
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create a high-frequency PWM output signal?
Background
A pulse-width modulated signal has many characteristics in common with the pulse-rate modulated signal discussed in 
HARDWARE PRM [page 742].
Like PRM, PWM is carried out by setting a port pin to Logic 1 for a period (X) and
then to Logic 0 for another period (Y). We then repeat this process (Figure 33.1).
The (average) voltage at the port pin is determined by the duty cycle of the wave-
form. The duty cycle and some other common PWM features are defined as follows:
xDuty cycle (%) =            ×100x+ y
Period = x + y, where xand yare in seconds.
1Frequency =           , where xand yare in seconds.x+ yMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 808
FIGURE  33.1 The underlying principles of PWMV
Timey xThe key point to note is that the average voltage seen by the load is given by the
duty cycle multiplied by the load voltage.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 834 ---
Solution
We consider the following issues in this section:
GCreating PWM signals using on-chip hardware
GCreating PWM signals using external hardware
GDetermining the required switching frequency
GBuffer and driver limitations
GSmoothing the PWM outputs
Creating PWM signals using on-chip hardware
We consider two specific examples of the generation of PWM signals using on-chip
hardware in this section.
The Infineon c515c
In the Infineon c515c the PWM timer (which is based on Timer 2) is incrementedwith the machine clock, at one-sixth of the oscillator frequency. To generate a 16-bitPWM signal at the maximum (10 MHz) operational frequency, the timer is incre-mented every 300 ns (0.3 µs). The total period is 2
16x 0.3 µs, which is 19,660.8 µs or
19.7 ms. The frequency is therefore approximately 50 Hz.
The Dallas 87C550
The Dallas 87C550 incorporates a high-speed, 4-channel, PWM hardware interface.The maximum PWM frequency (8-bit PWM, 12 MHz oscillator) is approximately46 kHz.
Creating PWM signals using external hardware
If your microcontroller does not have hardware PWM support, external PWM chipsare available: see, for example, the low-cost Dallas DS1050 family,
16which has a (5-
bit) PWM output operating at up to 100 kHz.
Determining the required switching frequency: general guidelines
Determining, on paper, the PWM frequency you need to use for your application isgenerally not easy: it depends on a number of factors associated with the load anddriver and it is generally necessary to perform some practical tests to determine therequired frequencies: we discuss such tests later.HARDWARE PWM 809
16.www.dalsemi.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 835 ---
However, some basic guidelines can be given:
GThe human eye can detect ‘flicker’ at rates of up to around 50 Hz. If your PWM
hardware is controlling something like a bulb, the user may be able to see theflicker if the switching frequency is below this.
GThe human auditory system has a range, at birth, of around 20 Hz to 20 kHz. Ifyou switch high-power loads within this range, it is likely that the results will beaudible to users, typically as a very annoying whine.
Determining the required switching frequency: practical studies
The only way of determining the required switching frequency in a practical applica-tion is to try a range of different frequencies. 
One flexible way of doing this is to use a signal generator to drive the hardware
and observe the results. 
An effective alternative, that can often be carried out using your prototype system,
is to apply the pattern 
HARDWARE PRM [page 742]. This allows the generation of
square waves with a fixed (50%) duty cycle but variable period, at frequencies fromless than 100 Hz to 3 MHz or more.
Buffer and driver limitations
The speed of the PWM hardware is, of course, not the only consideration in develop-ing a PWM interface. For example, Figure 33.2 shows a circuit which attempts toperform PWM-based speed control of an AC motor.
This approach is doomed to failure, since the switch time of the EM relay will, typi-
cally, be of the order of 10 milliseconds; this restricts the PWM switching frequencyto around 100 Hz. In many applications, this will not be adequate.
Smoothing the PWM outputs
It is sometimes necessary to smooth PWM outputs, in order to remove high-frequency harmonics: see 
PWM SMOOTHER [page 818] for details.
Hardware resource implications
The main hardware resource implication is that, if you use the on-chip PWM, this isoften based on Timer 2. As we have discussed, this timer is often used to drive thesystem scheduler (in a single-processor system).MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 810
It is essential that you check the switching times of both switch hardware and any
associated buffer circuitry when developing a PWM application.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 836 ---
Reliability and safety implications
PWM routines are frequently used with high-power loads and, as usual with such
loads, you need to ensure that your system starts in a safe state: for example, youneed to ensure that, when the microcontroller is reset, the associated machinerybegins at a slow speed, rather than a high speed. Refer to Chapters 7 and 8 for furtherdiscussion of this issue and some possible solutions.
More specifically, high-frequency PWM signals can be a source of EMI; this can be
a particular problem for microcontroller-based embedded applications. Please see Onget al. (2001) for further discussion of this issue.
Portability
A drawback with on-chip PWM hardware is that the features and implementation
vary greatly over the 8051 family. In general, code written for external PWM hard-ware will be more easily ported across the 8051 family
Overall strengths and weaknesses
PWM has been used for many years as efficient means of providing a contin-
uously varying output voltage to ‘slow’ external components, such as AC andHARDWARE PWM 811
FIGURE  33.2 An attempt to control the speed of an AC motor using PWM control, using a driver based
on an EM relay
[Note: This approach will fail, accept at very low switching frequencies.]PWM
interface 8051
deviceVdc
PNPVac
250V, 1Amotor
EM
relayMRsnubber
Csnubberwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 837 ---
DC motors and large heating elements. It remains a very effective way of
controlling such applications, without the need for complex external hard-ware, like digital-to-analogue converters (see 
DAC OUTPUT [page 841]).
PWM can be a source of EMI.
Not all 8051 devices have on-chip support for PWM. Where on-chip PWM support is available, it is in no sense ‘standard’ and code
written for one chip will not be particularly portable.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See SOFTWARE PWM [page 831]. 
See PWM SMOOTHER [page 818].
See DAC OUTPUT [page 841].
Example: Using the c515c on-chip ADC and PWM hardware
In this example, we consider the control the brightness of a bulb under PWM controlusing a c515c (Listings 33.1 to 33.4).
Any suitable hardware interface may be used, with AC or DC bulbs: see Chapters 7
and 8 for suggestions.
Note that, by increasing the light intensity slowly when power is applied, the stress
on the lamp filament can be greatly reduced, extending the bulb life. This can beeasily achieved with PWM circuits and is particularly effective in setting where it isphysically difficult or expensive to replace damaged bulbs.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project ADC_PWM (see Chap 33)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ ADC_515c.C -----------------------------------------------// ADC reading from Pin 6.0// ------ PWM_515c.C -----------------------------------------------// PWM output on Pin 1.1/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.1 Part of an example illustrating the use of on-chip PWM hardware in the
Infineon 515 familyMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 812www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 838 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 'ADC to PWM' example program (c515c)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "ADC_515c.h"
#include "PWM_515c.h"               
extern tByte Analog_G;/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main()
{AD_Init(); PWM_Init_T2();
while(1)
{AD_Get_Sample();PWM_Update_T2(Analog_G);}     
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.2 Part of an example illustrating the use of on-chip PWM hardware in the
Infineon 515 family
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_515c.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Rudimentary PWM library for 80c515c.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/HARDWARE PWM 813www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 839 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "PWM_515c.h"
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_Init_T2()Prepare on-chip PWM unit on the c515c.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_Init_T2(void)
{// ---------- T2 Mode ---------------------------// Mode 1 = Timerfunction
// Prescaler: Fcpu/6// ---------- T2 reload mode selection ----------
// Mode 0 = auto-reload upon timer overflow// Preset the timer register with autoreload value ! 0x0000;TL2 = 0x00;TH2 = 0xFF;
// ---------- T2 general compare mode ----------
//  Mode 0 for all channelsT2CON |= 0x11;
// ---------- T2 general interrupts ------------
//  timer 2 overflow interrupt is disabledET2=0;//  timer 2 external reload interrupt is disabledEXEN2=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 0 ---------
// disabled// Set Compare Register CRC on: 0xFF00;CRCL = 0x00;CRCH = 0xFF;
//  CC0/ext3 interrupt is disabled
EX3=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 1 ---------
// Compare enabled// Set Compare Register CC1 on: 0xFF80;CCL1 = 0x80;CCH1 = 0xFF;MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 814www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 840 ---
//  CC1/ext4 interrupt is disabled
EX4=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 2 ---------
// disabled// Set Compare Register CC2 on: 0x0000;CCL2 = 0x00;CCH2 = 0x00;//  CC2/ext5 interrupt is disabledEX5=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 3 ---------
// disabled// Set Compare Register CC3 on: 0x0000;CCL3 = 0x000;CCH3 = 0x000;
// CC3/ext6 interrupt is disabled
EX6=0;
// Set all above mentioned modes for channel 0-3 
CCEN = 0x08;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_Update_T2()Update the PWM output value (capture/compare Channel 1)Output is on Pin 1.1.NOTE: Hardware will continue to produce this value (indefinitely), 
without software intervention, until the next update.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_Update_T2(const tByte New_PWM_value)
{CCL1 = New_PWM_value;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.3 Part of an example illustrating the use of on-chip PWM hardware in the
Infineon 515 familyHARDWARE PWM 815www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 841 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
ADC_515c.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple, single-channel, 8-bit A-D (input) library for C515c
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.H"
//#include "Bargraph.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// Stores the most recent ADC readingtByte Analog_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
AD_Init()Set up the A-D converter.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void AD_Init(void)
{// Select internally-triggered single conversion// Reading from P6.0 (single channel)ADEX = 0;  // Internal A/D triggerADM = 0;   // Single conversion  MX2 = MX1 = MX0 = 0;  // Read from Channel 0 (Pin 6.0)
// Leave ADCON1 at reset value: prescalar is /4  
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
AD_Get_Sample()Get a single data sample (8 bits) from the (10-bit) ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void AD_Get_Sample(void)
{tWord Time_out_loop = 1;
// Take sample from A-D
// Write (value not important) to ADDATL to start conversionADDATL = 0x01; 
// Take sample from A-D (with simple loop time-out)MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 816www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 842 ---
while ((BSY == 1) && (Time_out_loop != 0));
{
//    Time_out_loop++;  // Disable for use in dScope...
}
if (!Time_out_loop)
{Analog_G = 0;}
else 
{     // 10-bit A-D result is now availableAnalog_G = ADDATH;  // Read only 8 most significant 8-bits of A-D}
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.4 Part of an example illustrating the use of on-chip PWM hardware in the
Infineon 515 family
Further reading
Ong, H.L.R, Pont, M.J. and Peasgood, W. (2001) ‘Do software-based techniques
increase the reliability of embedded applications in the presence of EMI?’,Microprocessors and Microsystems , 24(10): 481–91.HARDWARE PWM 817www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 843 ---
PWM SMOOTHER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you filter the output of a PWM generator?
Background
Refer to HARDWARE PWM [page 808] and A-A FILTER [page 794] for relevant back-
ground information.
Solution
We consider, first, why it may be necessary to smooth PWM signals. We then considerhow this can be achieved. Finally, we consider situations where the expense and com-plexity of PWM filtering may prove unnecessary.
Why do we need to smooth PWM signals?
In all the PWM signals we have considered in this book, the frequency of the wave-form is held constant while the duty cycle varies (from 0% to 100%) according to theamplitude of the original signal. The resulting time-domain representation of such asignal is shown in Figure 33.3.
If we consider the frequency-domain representation of this signal shown in
Figure 33.3, it is apparent that there is a strong peak at frequency 1/T: this is theMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 818
FIGURE  33.3 The representation of a PWM signal in the time domainV
Time (seconds) Period (T)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 844 ---
fundamental component of the PWM signal. In addition, there are harmonic peaks at
frequency N/T (where N is an integer) (Figure 33.4). 
The fundamental component of the PWM signal cannot be removed and we must
therefore ensure that an appropriate frequency (for example, outside the audible range)is chosen. However, the harmonic components are, as far as we are concerned, anunwanted noise source; these must generally be removed, using an appropriate filter. 
How do we remove PWM ‘noise’?
To remove PWM ‘noise’, the filter requirements are very similar to those discussed in
A-A FILTER [page 794]: that is, the ideal PWM smoothing filter has a ‘brick wall’ speci-
fication and a cut off frequency of 1/T (Figure 33.5).
As we discussed in A-A FILTER , filters with such characteristics are not (economi-
cally) viable in most applications and instead the design in Figure 33.6 will proveadequate in most situations.
Refer to 
A-A FILTER for implementation details.PWM SMOOTHER 819
FIGURE  33.4 The representation of a PWM signal in the frequency domain
[Note: This type of representation might be produced, for example, using a spectrum analyzer.]1/T 3/T 5/T 7/TFrequency (Hz)...Signal level
FIGURE  33.5 Removing ‘noise’ from PWM outputs using an ideal low-pass filter1/T 3/T 5/T 7/TIdeal low-pass fillter
Frequency (Hz)...Signal levelwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 845 ---
Do you need a PWM filter?
Not all applications require the use of a PWM filter. For example, in motor control (a
popular application area), PWM filtering is not generally necessary. Indeed, the mainarea in which filtering is required is in audio applications, such as speech generation.Note, however, that even in audio applications the need for filtering can be reduced ifa high PWM frequency is employed; for example, at a 100 kHz fundamental fre-quency, harmonic components will be beyond the (human) auditory range (but notthat of some other species).
Hardware resource implications
This hardware-only pattern has no particular implications for the use of (micro-controller) hardware resources.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of appropriate smoothing hardware can significantly reduce the levels of high-frequency EMI generated by PWM hardware; this can have important reliabilityimplications.
Portability
This hardware-only pattern is highly portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Reduces audio and EMI interference in the PWM output.
Adds to the system cost.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See A-A FILTER [page 794].MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 820
FIGURE  33.6 Removing ‘noise’ from PWM outputs using a more practical low-pass filter1/T 3/T 5/T 7/TPractical low-pass fillter
Frequency (Hz)...Signal levelwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 846 ---
Example: Creating a 5 kHz PWM smoothing filter
Refer to the ‘speech-recognition’ example in A-A FILTER [page 794] for implementa-
tion details of a suitable filter.
Further reading
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.
Oppenheim, A.V., Schafer, R.W. and Buck, J.R. (1999) Discrete-time Signal Processing ,
Prentice-Hall NJ.
Palacheria, A. (1997) ‘Using PWM to generate analog output’, Microchip Application
Note AN538.PWM SMOOTHER 821www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 847 ---
3-LEVEL PWM
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create a high-frequency PWM output without using specialized hardware?
Background
See HARDWARE PRM [page 742] for discussions of pulse-rate modulation.
Solution
Suppose we wish to control the speed of a DC motor. If we switch the motor on andoff at a slow rate via a single output pin on a microcontroller, we can view this as‘1-bit PWM’, or ‘2-level PWM’. That is, we are controlling the motor with a pulsewidth of zero, or an infinite pulse width.
We can take this one significant stage further. As we saw in 
HARDWARE PRM [page
742], the majority of modern 8051 devices contain Timer 2; this timer can be pro-grammed to generate a 50% duty cycle output at very high frequencies (up to 3 MHz,even with a 12 MHz / 12 oscillator cycle device). 
Using this option, plus the ‘on’ or ‘off’ capabilities just mentioned, we can do the
following with a minimal software load:
GRun the motor at full speed.
GRun the motor at half-speed, with a high-frequency PWM output.
GStop the motor.
This behaviour is adequate for many applications and is very low cost. Of course, it
may be applied equally well to other external devices, such as AC or DC lighting.
Hardware resource implications
This pattern requires the use of Timer 2. In single-processor applications, Timer 2 isoften the most suitable means of driving the scheduler itself; as a result, use of thistechnique may have an impact on other parts of the application.
Note that, if a two-processor solution is possible (using a UART- or interrupt-based
scheduler), then Timer 2 can be used to drive the scheduler in the Master node, leav-ing Timer 2 in the Slave node free for use as a PWM generator: see Part F for details ofvarious multiprocessor solutions that may be appropriate here.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 822www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 848 ---
Reliability and safety implications
This technique is very reliable.
Portability
This technique may only be used with 8052-based devices: that is, those with an
implementation of Timer 2 available. While most modern ‘8051s’ have such a timer,some popular devices – such as the Atmel Small 8051s – do not.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
A simple, effective technique for creating PRM signals over a very widefrequency range.
Imposes no measurable memory or CPU load.Requires exclusive use of Timer 2.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The most directly comparable patterns are SOFTWARE PWM [page 831] and HARDWARE
PWM [page 808].
As we noted in ‘Hardware resource implications’, it may be appropriate to use this
technique in a Slave node in a multiprocessor application. Please refer to the variouspatterns in Part F for further information on this topic.
Example: Menu-driven 3-level PWM example
We wish to control the brightness of the small bulb, illustrated in the hardwareschematic in Figure 33.7.3-LEVEL PWM 823
FIGURE  33.7 Controlling a small bulb using a BJT driverZTX751 (pnp)Vload
5.5V, 0.5A lamp
E
B
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 849 ---
A suitable small library for 3-LEVEL SOFTWARE PWM is presented in Listings 33.5 to
33.7.
Figure 33.8 shows the example running in the Keil hardware simulator.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PWM_3lev
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P2
#endif
// ------ PC_IO.C -----------------------------------------------
// Pins 3.0 and 3.1 used for RS-232 interface// ------ 3_PWM.C ------------------------------------------------sbit PWM_pin = P1^0;MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 824
FIGURE  33.8 Illustrating the use of the example 3-level PWM library in the Keil hardware simulator
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 850 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.5 Part of an example illustrating the generation of 3-level PWM signals
without specialized hardware
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for menu-driven 3-level PWM library.Linker options:OVERLAY (main ~ (PWM_3_Command_Processor), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (PWM_3_Command_Processor))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"#include "0_05_11g.h"
#include "PC_IO_T1.h"#include "PWM_3.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T0();
// Set baud rate to 9600: generic 8051 version
PC_LINK_Init_T1(9600);
// We have to schedule this task (10x – 100x a second)
//// TIMING IS IN TICKS NOT MILLISECONDS (5 ms tick interval)SCH_Add_Task(PWM_3_Command_Processor, 10, 2);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{// Displays error codes on P4 (see Sch51.C)3-LEVEL PWM 825www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 851 ---
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.6 Part of an example illustrating the generation of 3-level PWM signals
without specialized hardware
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 3-level PWM example (see Chap 33).Use 'Hyperterminal' (under Windows 95, 98, 2000) or similar 
terminal emulator program on other operating systems.
Terminal options: – Data bits = 8
– Parity = None– Stop bits = 1– Flow control = Xon / Xoff
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "0_05_11g.h"
#include "PWM_3.h"#include "PC_IO_T1.h"
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define PWM_OFF 1
#define PWM_ON 0
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Command_Processor()This function is the main menu 'command processor' function.  Schedule this once every 10 ms (approx.).MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 826www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 852 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Command_Processor(void)
{static bit First_time_only;char Ch;
if (First_time_only == 0)
{First_time_only = 1;PWM_3_Show_Menu();}
// Check for user inputs
PC_LINK_Update();
Ch = PC_LINK_Get_Char_From_Buffer();if (Ch != PC_LINK_NO_CHAR)
{PWM_3_Perform_Task(Ch);PWM_3_Show_Menu();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Show_Menu()Display menu options on PC screen (via serial link)
- edit as required to meet the needs of your application.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Show_Menu(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("Menu:\n"); PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("a – 0%\n");PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("b – 50%\n");PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("c – 100%\n\n");PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("? : ");}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Perform_Task()Perform the required user task
– edit as required to match the needs of your application.3-LEVEL PWM 827www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 853 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Perform_Task(char c)
{// Echo the menu optionPC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer(c);PC_LINK_Write_Char_To_Buffer('\n');
// Perform the task
switch (c)
{case 'a':case 'A':
{PWM_3_Set_000();break;}
case 'b':
case 'B':
{PWM_3_Set_050();break;}
case 'c':
case 'C':
{PWM_3_Set_100();}
} 
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Set_000()Set PWM output to 0% duty cycle.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Set_000(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** 0% ***\n\n");
TR2   = 0; // Stop Timer 2PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;  
}MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 828www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 854 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Set_050()Set PWM output to 50% duty cycle using Timer 2.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Set_050(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** 50% ***\n\n");
T2CON &= 0xFD;   // Clear *only* C /T2 bit
T2MOD |= 0x02;   // Set T2OE bit  (omit in basic 8052 clone)
// Set at lowest frequency (~45Hz with 12MHz xtal)
// – adjust as required (see PRM HARDWARE)TL2     = 0x00;   // Timer 2 low byteTH2     = 0x00;   // Timer 2 high byteRCAP2L  = 0x00;   // Timer 2 reload capture register, low byteRCAP2H  = 0x00;   // Timer 2 reload capture register, high byte
ET2   = 0; // No interrupt.TR2   = 1; // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_3_Set_100()Set PWM output to 100% duty cycle.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_3_Set_100(void)
{PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer("\n*** Doing C ***\n\n");
TR2   = 0; // Stop Timer 2PWM_pin = PWM_ON;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.7 Part of an example illustrating the generation of 3-level PWM signals
without specialized hardware3-LEVEL PWM 829www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 855 ---
Further reading
Huang, H-W (2000) Using the MCS-51 Microcontroller , Oxford University Press, New
York.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 830www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 856 ---
SOFTWARE PWM
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create a low-frequency PWM output signal without using specializedPWM hardware?
Background
See HARDWARE PWM [page 808] for general background material on PWM.
See SOFTWARE PRM [page 748] for a similar solution.
Solution
The techniques discussed in SOFTWARE PRM [page 748] may be readily adapted to
allow us to generate low-frequency pulse-width modulated signals. Listing 33.8 illus-trates this.
void PWM_Soft_Update(void)
{// Have we reached the end of the current PWM cycle?
if (++PWM_position_G >= PWM_PERIOD)
{// Reset the PWM position counterPWM_position_G = 0;
// Update the PWM control value
PWM_G = PWM_new_G; 
// Set the PWM output to OFF
PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;
return;
}
// We are in a PWM cycle
if (PWM_position_G < PWM_G)SOFTWARE PWM 831www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 857 ---
{
PWM_pin = PWM_ON;}
else
{PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;}
}
Listing 33.8 Implementing software PWM
The key to Listing 33.8 is the use of the variables PWM_position_G, PWM_period_G
and PWM_period_new_G :
GPWM_period_G is the current PRM period. Note that if the update function is
scheduled every millisecond, this period is in milliseconds. PWM_period_G is fixed
during the program execution. 
GPWM_G represents the current PWM duty cycle (see Figure 33.9).
GPWM_new_G is the next PWM duty cycle. This period may be varied by the user, as
required. Note that the ‘new’ value is only copied to PWM_G at the end of a PWM
cycle, to avoid noise. 
GPWM_position_G is the current position in the PWM cycle. This is incremented by
the update function. Again, the units are milliseconds if these conditions apply.
The link between these various variables and constants is illustrated in Figure 33.9.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 832
FIGURE  33.9 Implementing pulse-rate modulation in softwareif (PRM_position_G < PWM_G)
   {   PRM_pin = PWM_ON:   }else   {   PRM_pin = PWM_OFF:   }PRM_period_G
PRM_position_G
PRM_Gwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 858 ---
Using a 1 ms scheduler, the PWM frequency (Hz) and PWM resolution (%) we
obtain are given by:
1000FrequencyPWM=2N
and:
1ResolutionPWM=        ×100%2N
where N is the number of PWM bits you use.
For example, 5-bit PWM allows you to control the output to a resolution of
approximately 3%, at a frequency of approximately 31 Hz.
Hardware resource implications
SOFTWARE PWM has no significant hardware resource implications.
Reliability and safety implications
When working with PWM, you may be switching high-power loads and / or mains
voltages. You need to take care with start-up states, to ensure that any equipment youare controlling is not going to cause damage or injury when the application starts.
Portability
SOFTWARE PWM uses only core 8051 features: it may be easily used throughout the
8051 family.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
PWM has been used for many years as efficient means of providing a continu-ously varying output voltage to ‘slow’ external components, such as AC and DCmotors and large heating elements. It remains a very effective way of control-ling such applications, without the need for digital-to-analogue converters.
SOFTWARE PWM does not impose a heavy CPU load.
SOFTWARE PWM can only operate at comparatively low frequencies. For example,
at a 1 ms tick rate and 8-bit PWM, the PWM frequency is 1000 / 256: that is, lessthan 4 Hz. Typical hardware PWM units operate at up to 100 kHz. For many
applications, high-speed PWM is an important consideration: please see 
HARD -
WARE PWM [page 808] for further information on this issue.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See HARDWARE PWM [page 808] for one alternative.SOFTWARE PWM 833www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 859 ---
An alternative implementation of the present pattern is also worth highlighting.
Consider the code shown in Listing 33.9.
void Fast_Software_PWM_Update(void)
{tWord PWM_position;
for (PWM_position = 0; PWM_position < PWM_INCREMENTS; PWM_position++)
{if (PWM_position < PWM_G)
{PWM_pin = PWM_ON;}
else
{PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;}
// Appropriate delay here
PWM_Delay();}
}
Listing 33.9 Attempting to increase the frequency of software-only PWM signals
In this solution, we assume that we are generating an entire PWM cycle every time we
call the task: this seems to offer the possibility of generating faster PWM signals. Forexample, at a 0.25 ms tick intervals, we can generate a 4 kHz PWM frequency, whichwill be adequate for many applications. Moreover, we can generate any number of‘PWM_INCREMENTS’: that is, any required bit rate.
However, this solution has two problems. The first is that the CPU is tied up, com-
pletely, in the PWM signal generation. This is not insurmountable but might mean,for example, that the solution could only be implemented on a Slave node in a multi-processor system.
The second problem is more serious and relates to the delays required within the
loop. For example, at a 1 ms tick interval, the generation of 5-bit PWM outputsrequires the generation of delays of precisely 3.125 µs. This is very difficult to achieve,as we discussed in Chapter 11. At higher bit rates and tick frequencies, the requireddelays are very much shorter and cannot be obtained in most implementations.
Example: Controlling the brightness of a bulb
We again wish to control the brightness of the small bulb, illustrated in the hardwareschematic in Figure 33.10.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 834www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 860 ---
A suitable small library for software PWM is presented in Listings 33.10 to 33.12.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PWM_Soft (see Chap 33)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ PWM_Soft.C -----------------------------------------------sbit PWM_pin = P1^0;SOFTWARE PWM 835
FIGURE  33.10 Controlling the brightness of a bulbZTX751 (pnp)Vload
5.5V, 0.5A lamp
E
B
CTo microcontroller output pin
(Logic 0 to turn on lamp)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 861 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.10 Part of an example illustrating the generation of PWM signals without
specialized hardware
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Test program for 'Software PWM' library.See Chapter 33 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h"#include "PWM_Soft.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main()
{SCH_Init_T2();  
PWM_Soft_Init();  // Call every millisecond to update PWM output
SCH_Add_Task(PWM_Soft_Update, 0, 1);
// Call every five seconds to change PWM control value
SCH_Add_Task(PWM_Soft_Test, 10, 3000);
SCH_Start();while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}     
} MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 836www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 862 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.11 Part of an example illustrating the generation of PWM signals without
specialized hardware
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_SOFT.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 'Software PWM' library.See Chapter 32 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "2_01_12g.h"
#include "PWM_Soft.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// Set this variable to the required PWM value
tByte PWM_new_G;
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define PWM_ON 0
#define PWM_OFF 1
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// The PWM counter
static tWord PWM_position_G;static tByte PWM_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_Soft_Test()To test the PWM library, this function is called once every 
five seconds, to update the PWM settings.
NOTE:
In a real application, this function will be replaced by a user-defined function for setting brightness, speed, etc.SOFTWARE PWM 837www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 863 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_Soft_Test(void)
{if (++PWM_new_G >= PWM_PERIOD)
{PWM_new_G = 0;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_Soft_Init()Prepares some of the key PWM variables.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_Soft_Init(void)
{// Init the main variablePWM_new_G = 0;PWM_position_G = 0;PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PWM_Soft_Update()The key PWM function.  Schedule as rapidly as possible.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PWM_Soft_Update(void)
{// Have we reached the end of the current PWM cycle?if (++PWM_position_G >= PWM_PERIOD)
{// Reset the PWM position counterPWM_position_G = 0;
// Update the PWM control value
PWM_G = PWM_new_G; 
// Set the PWM output to OFF
PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;
return;
}MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 838www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 864 ---
// We are in a PWM cycle
if (PWM_position_G < PWM_G)
{PWM_pin = PWM_ON;}
else
{PWM_pin = PWM_OFF;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 33.12 Part of an example illustrating the generation of PWM signals without
specialized hardware
Further reading
—SOFTWARE PWM 839www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 865 ---
Using digital-to-analog 
converters (DACs)
Introduction
In the 1980s, if you wanted to create an analog signal from a microcontroller, you
would probably have used a ‘digital-to-analog converter’ (DAC). More recently, as theoperating frequencies for digital hardware have grown, pulse-width modulation(PWM) has become a more cost-effective means of creating an analog signal in manycircumstances. As a result, use of DACs in areas such as motor control and roboticshas become much less common.
However, there are two main sets of circumstances in which use of a DAC is still
cost-effective: in high-frequency / high bit-rate applications (particularly audio appli-cations) and in process control.
We consider how to use a DAC to generate analog outputs in this chapter. In doing
so we present the following patterns:
GDAC OUTPUT [page 841] 
GDAC SMOOTHER [page 853] 
GDAC DRIVER [page 857] chapter 34www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 866 ---
DAC OUTPUT
Context
You are developing a ‘hard’ or ‘soft’ real-time application, for either a desktop or
embedded environment (see Chapter 1 for definitions of these various terms).
Problem
How do you use a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to generate analog signals?
Background
Suppose you are developing an intruder alarm system for a home environment. In theevent of a break-in, we generally expect simply to sound an alarm (ring a bell) tonotify the neighbours. This is adequate: the intruder alarm is only intended to detectone kind of problem.
However, suppose you are developing a safety monitoring system for an industrial
plant. Various problems may arise: different forms of gas leak, nuclear materials leak,fire, intruder and so forth. In some situations, those in the plant need to take differ-ent action (for example, donning different kinds of protective clothing), dependingon the type of threat they face. 
How do we tell those in the plant what kind of problem has occurred?One appropriate solution might be to use digitized messages that describe the
problem and tell users what to do. For example: ‘Warning, a leak of Contaminant 356has been detected at a level of 345 parts per million. Please use your respirator nowand leave the building via your designated escape route.’
To play back this type of message, we will generally require a digital-to-analog con-
verter (DAC). 
DACs have an important role, not only in the playback of digitized warnings, but
also in other control applications. We consider how to use DACs in this pattern.
Solution
There are several key design decisions that must be made when generating an analogoutput:
1You need to determine the required sample rate.
2You need to determine the required bit rate (DAC resolution).
3You need to select an 8051 family member with an appropriate DAC or, if neces-sary, add an external DAC.DAC OUTPUT 841www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 867 ---
4You may need to shape the frequency response of the output signal.
5You need to use an appropriate software architecture.
We now deal with each of these points in turn.
Determining the required sample rate
Refer to SEQUENTIAL ADC [page 782] for discussions on sample rates.
Determining the required bit rate
Refer to ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757] for discussions on bit rates.
8051 microcontrollers with on-chip DACs
While, as we saw in ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757], many 8051 microcontrollers contain
on-chip ADCs, the number of devices with on-chip DACs is very limited. 
Some examples of the available DAC components provided on two recent 8051
devices follow.
Analog Devices ADµC812 
Adapted from the Analog Devices17data sheet:
The ADµC812 incorporates two 12-bit voltage-mode DACs On-Chip. 
DAC operation is controlled via three special function registers. In normal mode of oper-
ation, each DAC is updated when the low DAC byte (DACxL) SFR is written. Both DACs canbe updated simultaneously using the SYNC bit in the DACCON SFR. The DAC's can operate in12 or 8-bit modes and have programmable output ranges of 0 -> 2.5V or 0 ->VDD.
Cygnal C8051F000
Adapted from the Cygnal18C8051F000 data sheet:
The C8051F000 MCU family has two 12-bit voltage-mode DACs (DAC0, DAC1). 
Each DAC has an output swing of 0V to VREF-1LSB for a corresponding input code range of
0x000 to 0xFFF. Using DAC0 as an example, the 12-bit data word is written to the low byte(DAC0L) and high byte (DAC0H) data registers. Data is latched into DAC0 after a write to thecorresponding DAC0H register, so the write sequence should be DAC0L followed by DAC0H ifthe full 12-bit resolution is required. The DAC can be used in 8-bit mode by initializing DAC0Lto the desired value (typically 0x00), and writing data to only DAC0H. DAC0 Control Register(DAC0CN) provides a means to enable/disable DAC0 and to modify its input data formatting.
The DAC0 enable/disable function is controlled by the DAC0EN bit (DAC0CN.7). Writing a 1
to DAC0EN enables DAC0 while writing a 0 to DAC0EN disables DAC0. While disabled, theMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 842
17.www.analog.com
18.www.cygnal.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 868 ---
output of DAC0 is maintained in a high-impedance state, and the DAC0 supply current falls to
1uA or less.
In some instances, input data should be shifted prior to a DAC0 write operation to properly
justify data within the DAC input registers. This action would typically require one or more loadand shift operations, adding software overhead and slowing DAC throughput. To alleviate thisproblem, the data-formatting feature provides a means for the user to program the orientationof the DAC0 data word within data registers DAC0H and DAC0L. The three DAC0DF bits(DAC0CN.[2:0]) allow the user to specify one of five data word orientations.
DAC1 is functionally the same as DAC0 described above. 
Using an external voltage-mode DAC
In general, while the use of an internal DAC will result in increased reliability, smaller
system size and lower system cost, this is not always possible.
As with ADCs, both parallel and serial (voltage-mode) DACs are available. For
example, in terms of parallel components, Analog Devices19produce the parallel
AD7245a (12-bit), AD7248a (12-bit) and AD7801 (8-bit), while Maxim20produce the
Max5480 (8-bit). In serial devices, Maxim (again) produce, for example, the Max517with an I
2C interface and the Max541 with an SPI interface: refer to Part E for discus-
sion of the use of these interfaces in a time-triggered environment.
Because we will generally be using DACs in circumstances where a high bit-rate and
sample frequency is required, the parallel solution will often be the most practical solution.
Using an external current-mode DAC or a transconductance amplifier
As we discussed in ONE-SHOT ADC [page 757], there are circumstances, particularly in
monitoring or process control, when the use of current-mode components (sensors oractuators) may be more appropriate than the use of voltage-mode devices.
To generate analog current signals from a microcontroller, we have two main options:
GUse a current-mode DAC
GUse a voltage-mode DAC anda voltage-to-current converter (often referred to as a
transconductance amplifier )
The second option may be particularly attractive if your microcontroller has an on-
chip DAC.
An example of a suitable DAC component is the Analog Devices21AD421, a
DAC designed specifically for 4 to 20mA current loops and which is powered by theloop itself. 
An example of a transconductance amplifier is the XTR 110 from Burr Brown.22This
can be used, for example, to convert a 1–5V analog voltage (from, say, a microcon trollerDAC OUTPUT 843
19.www.analog.com
20.www.maxim-ic.com
21.www.analog.com
22.www.burr-brown.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 869 ---
voltage-mode DAC output) into the 4–20mA range required in process-control appli-
cations. As such, it can be a useful component in some ‘intelligent’ process sensors.
Shaping the frequency response
Use of a DAC will introduce ‘noise’ (through aliasing effects) and frequency distor-tions. In most cases, the aliasing effects, at least, must be eliminated: see 
DAC
SMOOTHER [page 853] for further details. 
General implications for the software architecture
The use of a DAC at high frequencies (10 kHz or 16 kHz) will have a major impact on
the overall architecture of your application. For example, even at 10 kHz, you mayrequire a 0.1 ms tick interval. This imposes a substantial load on a basic 8051 device.
In general, only 8051 devices which operate fewer than 12 clock cycles per instruction
can provide these levels of performance. Use of recent devices such as the Dallas 89C420(a ‘Standard 8051’ with 1 clock cycle per instruction, operating at up to 50 MHz: seeChapter 3) can make it practical to operate at 16 kHz (0.0625 ms tick interval).
Hardware resource implications
Use of the internal ADC will generally mean that at least one input pin is unavailablefor other purposes; use of an external ADC will require the use of larger numbers ofport pins.
Use of the ADC may also have an impact on the power consumption of your
microcontroller.
Reliability and safety implications
In general, use of on-chip DACs is likely to improve the system reliability (comparedwith an off-chip solution), since the hardware (and, possibly, software) complexity,number of soldered joints, etc., are all greatly reduced.
More specifically, use of a DAC with a long conversion time may introduce delays
that will impact on the general performance of signal-processing applications andwhich may impact on the stability of control applications. Make sure the speed of theDAC is an appropriate match for your intended application.
Portability
All DAC components vary. The principles and basic techniques are portable but thedetails will always be heavily hardware dependent.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
DAC outputs are essential in many applications and are generally easy to use.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 844www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 870 ---
Microcontrollers with on-board DACs are comparatively rare and more expen-
sive than those without such facilities.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In many cases, PWM outputs (see Chapter 33) provide a low-cost and effective
alternative to the use of DACs: see HARDWARE PWM [page 808].
See DAC SMOOTHER [page 853] for techniques suitable for removing ‘noise’
(introduced through aliasing effects) and frequency distortions introduced by the useof DACs.
See 
DAC DRIVER [page 857] for information about the hardware needed to drive
high-power loads, such as loudspeakers or DC motors.
Example: Speech playback using a 12-bit parallel DAC
Here we consider how we can use a 12-bit parallel DAC to play back a speech sampleat a 10 kHz sample rate.
Figure 34.1 shows the speech waveform.
Figure 34.2 shows the basic hardware used. Note that the necessary smoothing and
amplification components will be discussed in 
DAC SMOOTHER [page 853] and DAC
DRIVER [page 857].
The key code listings are given in Listings 34.1 to 34.4.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project Play_DAC
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/DAC OUTPUT 845
FIGURE  34.1 An example of a fragment of speech
050010001500200025003000350040004500
Timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 871 ---
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------
// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ Playback.c -----------------------------------------------#define SPEECH_Port P2
sbit SPEECH_CSLSB_pin = P0^0;sbit SPEECH_CSMSB_pin = P0^1; 
// ------ Swit_Ply.c -----------------------------------------------MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 846
FIGURE  34.2 Using an AD7148A for speech playbackVCC
8051
VSS32
33343536373839
8
765432118
19
9
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
DB7
DB6DB5DB4DB3DB2DB1DB0
/WR VssAD7248A
AGNDVout/CSMS8/LDAC/CSLSB5K 5K+5 V +12 V
XTL1
XTL2RST
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7
P1.6P1.5P1.4P1.3P1.2P1.1P1.0
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 872 ---
// Connect single push-button switch on this pin (to gnd)
// - debounced in softwaresbit Sw_pin = P3^3;    // The switch pin
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 34.1 Part of an example illustrating the control of an external 12-bit
(parallel) DAC
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Speech playback example, uses hybrid scheduler.
Required linker options (see Chapter 13 for details):
OVERLAY 
(main ~ (SWITCH_Update), 
SWITCH_Update ~ (SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Update),hSCH_dispatch_tasks ! (SWITCH_Update, SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_01_12h.h" #include "Swit_Ply.h"#include "Playback.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerhSCH_Init_T2();
// Set up the switch pin
SWITCH_Init();
// Add the 'switch' task (check every 200 ms)
// THIS IS A PRE-EMPTIVE TASKhSCH_Add_Task(SWITCH_Update, 0, 200, 0);DAC OUTPUT 847www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 873 ---
// NOTE:
// 'Playback' task is added by the SWITCH_Update task// (as requested by user)// 'Playback' is CO-OPERATIVE// *** NOTE REQUIRED LINKER OPTIONS (see above) ***
// Start the scheduler
hSCH_Start();
while(1)
{hSCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 34.2 Part of an example illustrating the control of an external 12-bit
(parallel) DAC
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Playback.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Library of functions to allow playback of stored speech sample
from on-chip ROM.
Assumes presence of AD7248A DAC: see text for hardware connections.Play back continuously while switch is depressed.Data are replayed at 10 kHz, 12-bit resolution.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Playback.h"// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------// The speech data we are going to play
extern const tWord code BA_12_BIT_10KHZ_G[3500];
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 848www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 874 ---
extern bit Sw_pressed_G;
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------bit SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G = 0;// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------static bit LED_state_G;// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define T_100micros (65536 - (tWord)((OSC_FREQ / 13000)/(OSC_PER_INST)))  
#define T_100micros_H (T_100micros / 256)#define T_100micros_L (T_100micros % 256)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Update()The main update function for the playback software.This will usually be scheduled, as required, as a one-shot 
(co-operative) task.
Task duration is approximately 350 milliseconds. User can abort at any time by releasing the switch.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Update(void)
{int Sample;
SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G = 0;// Configure Timer 0 as a 16-bit timer 
TMOD &= 0xF0; // Clear all T0 bits (T1 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x01; // Set required T0 bits (T1 left unchanged) ET0 = 0;  // No interrupts
// Playback at ~ 10 kHz
for (Sample = 0; Sample < 3500; Sample++)
{// Avoid multiple calls to this functionSPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G = 1;
// Play a sample
SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Play_Sample(BA_12_BIT_10KHZ_G[Sample]);
// Delay ~0.1 ms (to give 10 kHz sample rate)            
TR0 = 0;  TH0 = T_100micros_H; DAC OUTPUT 849www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 875 ---
TL0 = T_100micros_L;
TF0 = 0; // Clear flagTR0 = 1; // Start timerwhile (!TF0);TR0 = 0;  
if (!Sw_pressed_G)
{break; // Abort loop if user releases switch}
}
// Set flag to 0 as we leave this function
SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Play_Sample()Send 12-bit data sample to AD7248A ADC. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Play_Sample(const tWord SAMPLE)
{// Samples are 12-bits, in 16-bit (tWord) value
// Send lower 8 bits first
tByte Data_8bit = (tByte) (SAMPLE & 0x00FF);
SPEECH_Port = Data_8bit;
SPEECH_CSLSB_pin = 0;SPEECH_CSMSB_pin = 1; 
// Now the upper 4 bits
Data_8bit = (tByte) ((SAMPLE >> 8) & (0x0F));
SPEECH_Port = Data_8bit;
SPEECH_CSLSB_pin = 1;SPEECH_CSMSB_pin = 0; }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 34.3 Part of an example illustrating the control of an external 12-bit
(parallel) DACMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 850www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 876 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWIT_PLY.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple switch interface code, with software debounce.Controls DAC speech playback.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Swit_Ply.h"
#include "Playback.h"#include "2_01_12h.h" 
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------bit Sw_pressed_G = 0; // The current switch status// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------extern bit SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G;  // Current playback status// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------// Allows NO or NC switch to be used (or other wiring variations)
#define SW_PRESSED (0)
// SW_THRES must be > 1 for correct debounce behaviour
#define SW_THRES (3)
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_Init()Initialization function for the switch library.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_Init(void)
{Sw_pin = 1; // Use this pin for input}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SWITCH_Update()This is the main switch function.  
It should be scheduled every 50 - 500 ms.DAC OUTPUT 851www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 877 ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SWITCH_Update(void)
{static tByte Duration;
if (Sw_pin == SW_PRESSED)
{Duration += 1;
if (Duration > SW_THRES)
{Duration = SW_THRES;
Sw_pressed_G = 1;  // Switch is pressed...// We add the 'playback' task to the scheduler here
// (after checking if it is already running)// Add the 'playback' task (duration 10 seconds)// THIS IS A CO-OPERATIVE (one-shot) TASKif (SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Playing_G == 0)
{hSCH_Add_Task(SPEECH_PLAYBACK_Update, 0, 0, 1);}
return;
}
// Switch pressed, but not yet for long enough
Sw_pressed_G = 0;return; }
// Switch not pressed - reset the count
Duration = 0;Sw_pressed_G = 0;  // Switch not pressed...}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 34.4 Part of an example illustrating the control of an external 12-bit
(parallel) DAC
Further reading
—MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 852www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 878 ---
DAC SMOOTHER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you reduce ‘conversion noise’ from the output of a digital-to-analog            con-verter?
Background
See DAC OUTPUT [page 841] for background information.
Solution
Suppose we wish to create a high-quality digital communication system, to be used ina hydrofoil. Specifically, we will assume that the hydrofoil contains a computer net-work intended for non-critical operations, such as monitoring the passenger cabintemperature; this network has spare bandwidth, which we intend to utilize to providethe means of conveying messages from the crew to the passengers (Figure 34.3).DAC SMOOTHER 853
FIGURE  34.3 A digital communication system designed for use in a hydrofoilTransmitter
(Master)Receiver A
(Slave)Receiver B
(Slave)Receiver C
(Slave)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 879 ---
To play back the speech signals (transmitted digitally over the network), we will
use the hardware shown in Figure 34.4. We assume that this hardware is repeated oneach of the Slave nodes.
Unfortunately, the quality of the speech produced from this system will be very
poor, for two reasons.
The first (and main) cause of poor quality will be aliasing effects: see 
ONE-SHOT
ADC [page 757] for discussion of this issue. The impact of aliasing effects can be
removed using a low-pass filter with a cutoff frequency at half the sample rate. Theimplementation of suitable filters is discussed in detail in 
A-A FILTER [page 794].
The second cause of poor playback quality is that the DAC output is quantized and
that, rather than reproducing the waveform shown in Figure 34.5 (top), a waveformsimilar to that shown in Figure 34.5 (bottom) will be generated.
The ‘staircase’ nature of the DAC output introduces distortions which vary with
frequency; to remove these effects, we need to employ a technique known as ‘sinccompensation’; this involves applying a comparatively complex filtering operation (asinc filter) to the DAC signal. The technical details of this compensation are beyondthe scope of this text (see, for example, Smith, 1999, for details).MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 854
FIGURE  34.4 Hardware to be used for speech playbackAudio
amplifierVCC
8051
VSS32
33343536373839
8
765432118
19
9
29
3031
17
16151413121110
2040
DB7
DB6DB5DB4DB3DB2DB1DB0
/WR VssAD7248A
/CSMS8/LDAC/CSLSB5K 5K+5 V +12 V
XTL1
XTL2RST
/PSEN
ALE(/PROG)/EA
P 3.7 (/RD)
P 3.6 (/WR)P 3.5 (T1)P 3.4 (T0)P 3.3 (/INT1)P 3.2 (/INT0)P 3.1 (TXD)P 3.0 (RXD)P 0.7 (AD7)
P 0.6 (AD6)P 0.5 (AD5)P 0.4 (AD4)P 0.3 (AD3)P 0.2 (AD2)P 0.1 (AD1)P 0.0 (AD0)
P1.7
P1.6P1.5P1.4P1.3P1.2P1.1P1.0
P 2.7 (A15)
P 2.6 (A14)P 2.5 (A13)P 2.4 (A12)P 2.3 (A11)P 2.2 (A10)
P 2.1 (A9)P 2.0 (A8)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 880 ---
Overall, for the highest quality reproduction we require the arrangement shown in
Figure 34.6. However, in most applications, use of the low-pass filter alone (with acut-off at half the sampling frequency), will provide adequate performance.
Hardware resource implications
This hardware-only pattern has no particular implications for the use of (microcon-troller) hardware resources.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of appropriate smoothing hardware may help reduce the levels of high-frequencyEMI generated by DAC hardware in some circumstances; this can help improvesystem reliability.DAC SMOOTHER 855
FIGURE  34.5 A quantized sine wave0246810
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
0246810
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10Time
Time
FIGURE  34.6 Producing high-quality audio signals from a DACAudio
amplifierSinc-compensation
filterLow-pass
filterDACwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 881 ---
Portability
This hardware-only pattern is highly portable.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Reduces conversion noise in the DAC output.
Adds to the system cost.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See A-A FILTER [page 794].
Example: Speech playback using a 12-bit parallel DAC
Consider the speech playback example presented on page 845 in DAC OUTPUT .
To complete the hardware for this example, we require at least two further compo-
nents: appropriate filters and some form of amplifier.
We consider here the required filters.As noted in this pattern, removal of frequency components at frequencies about
Fs/2 (where Fs is the sampling frequency) is essential to avoid aliasing effects. Here,we will ignore the use of sinc compensation.
A suitable 5 kHz filter is given in Figure 34.7. Please refer to 
A-A FILTER [page 794]
for further details of the design process required to create this (op-amp) filter.
Further reading
Smith, S.W. (1999) The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing , 2nd edn,
California Technical Publishing. [Available electronically at www.DSPguide.com]MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 856
FIGURE  34.7 An 5 kHz low-pass filter suitable for use with the speech playback example+
–Op-amp21.4K
0.0022 µF6.51K0.0033 µF
Vin +
–Op-amp16.3K
0.0022 µF4.15K0.0068 µF
+
–Op-amp5.80K
0.0022 µF1.89K0.0047 µF
Voutwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 882 ---
DAC DRIVER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you convert the output from a voltage-mode ADC into a form suitable fordriving high-power loads?
Background
See DAC OUTPUT [page 841] for background details on DACs.
Solution
Voltage-mode DACs are low-power devices; for example, the Maxim Max541 is a16-bit DAC with an ability to handle a maximum (analog) current of the 50 mA.
23
Clearly if we wish to use such a device to drive, say, a DC motor, we require someform of buffer circuit.
As we saw in Chapter 7, when we considered the switching of DC loads, there are
two main alternatives when driving high-power loads: use a solution based on dis-crete components (which generally means BJTs) or an IC-based solution (whichgenerally means a power op-amp).
We illustrate these solutions in the examples that follow.
Hardware resource implications
Use of this pattern has no implications for the hardware resources (e.g. CPU time ormemory) on the microcontroller itself. 
Reliability and safety implications
There are no specific reliability or safety implications.
Portability
This hardware-only pattern can be used with any microcontroller.DAC DRIVER 857
23. This figure is higher than many common DAC chipswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 883 ---
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Simple and effective.
May require use of a two-rail power supply if op-amps are employed.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See DAC OUTPUT [page 841].
See DAC SMOOTHER [page 853].
Example: Driving a speaker using discrete components
Figure 34.8 illustrates a BJT-based amplifier circuit. Specifically, the two transistors arearranged as a ‘Darlington pair’, to increase the circuit gain. This is typically necessarybecause the gain of power transistors (such as the 2N3055) is particularly limited.
Example: Driving a speaker using a power op-amp
The National Semiconductor24LM12CL, an IC-based power amplifier suitable for use
in high-quality audio equipment, is shown in Figure 34.9. In this amplifier, harmonicdistortion is claimed to be ~0.01%. MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 858
FIGURE  34.8 Amplifying the output from a DAC in order to drive a small loudspeaker2N2222C
EB
2N3055C
EB
50Ω+12 V
Analogue
input(from DAC)
10 µF
Speaker100Ω
24.www.national.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 884 ---
Further reading
—DAC DRIVER 859
FIGURE  34.9 A power amplifier suitable for use in high-quality audio equipment (reproduced courtesy
of National Semiconductor.)A1
LM12–
+C1
1.5n
R3
3.3KL1
4µ
R4
2.2OUT
D1
MR752
D2
MR752C3
3900 µC2
3900 µ
R1
1KINR2
1.1K
Common
ground
point++
v–v+www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 885 ---
Taking control
Introduction
The focus of the chapter is on proportional-integral-differential (PID) control. PID is
both simple and effective: as a consequence it is the most widely used control algo-rithm. The focus here will be on techniques for designing and implementing PIDcontrollers for use in embedded applications.chapter 35www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 886 ---
PID CONTROLLER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you design and implement a PID control algorithm?
Background
We consider in this section why we need ‘closed-loop’ control algorithms.
Open-loop control
Suppose we wish to control the speed of a DC motor, used as part of an air-traffic con-trol application (Figure 35.1). To control this speed, we will assume that we havedecided to change the applied motor voltage using a DAC.
25
As described, this is an example of a much more general ‘open-loop’ control
approach (Figure 35.2).PID CONTROLLER 861
FIGURE  35.1 A radar used as part of an air-traffic control application
25. We could use PWM control here: this would, however, simply complicate the example and would
not alter the general conculsionswww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 887 ---
Using open-loop control, we need to know what the system parameters are that
will be required to create the desired system outputs. Thus, in the case of our air-traffic system, having knowledge of the motor, radar hardware and the motor drivecircuit, we can set the speed of rotation that we require. 
In an ideal world, this type of open-loop control system would be easy to design:
we would simply have a lookup table linking the required motor speed to therequired output parameters. For example, consider the DC motor to be used at theheart of this navigation system. We might start by assuming that this motor has aspeed of operation directly proportional to the applied voltage (Figure 35.3).
As a result, to set the required speed of rotation, we should be able to use a lookup
table (Table 35.1).MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 862
FIGURE  35.2 A schematic representation of an open-loop control systemOpen-loop
controllerControlled
systemActual
outputDesired
output
FIGURE  35.3 A simple model predicting the likely speed of rotation of a DC motor as the voltage is
variedInput (v)Output (s)
s = 100v
TABLE 35.1 Translating the simple model in Figure 35.3 into a lookup table
Radar rotation speed (RPM) DAC setting (8-bit)
00
25 1
4 102
6 153
8 204
10 255www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 888 ---
This is an example of a general, linear, single-input single-output (SISO) system:
this type of system can be represented graphically as shown in Figure 35.4.
Unfortunately, such linearity is very rare in practical systems. For example, our
practical motor will have a maximum input voltage and a corresponding maximumspeed of rotation (Figure 35.5). In addition, our practical motor will not begin rotat-ing until a certain minimum voltage has been reached and will not abruptly stop at amaximum speed of rotation, but will have an I-O curve something like that shown inFigure 35.6.
Overall, our real motor is a non-linear system: it cannot be accurately represented
by a simple linear (‘straight line’) model. Simply by inspecting Figure 35.6, we can seethat to write down a description of this curve (that is, create a model of this motor) isgoing to be more complex than describing the simple linear model in Figure 35.3.Nonetheless, our (open-loop) lookup table solution can be adapted to deal with thisnon-linearity (Table 35.2).PID CONTROLLER 863
FIGURE  35.4 Modelling a linear systemInput (x)Output (y)y = ax + b
∆y
∆x bOutput (y) Input (x) Linear System
y = ax + ba =∆y
∆x
FIGURE  35.5 A slightly more realistic model predicting the likely speed of rotation of a DC motor as the
voltage is variedInput (v)Output (s)
Max. speedwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 889 ---
However, this is not the only problem we have to deal with. Table 35.2 has, we
assume, been created as a result of a series of tests on the real system. It thereforetakes into account the non-linear nature of the motor and other system components.However, in addition to their non-linearity, most real systems also demonstrate char-acteristics which vary with time. In the case of the radar system, Table 35.2 does nottake into account the wind speed or wind direction. As a result, this table of values isonly valid (say) in still (wind-free) conditions. 
If we are determined to use an open-loop approach, we will need to measure the
wind speed and wind direction (Figure 35.7). Then we will need to create anothertable for 5 mph SE winds and another for 10 mph NW winds and so on.
Overall, this approach to control system design quickly becomes impractical.
Closed-loop control
The fundamental problem with the open-loop version of the radar control system isthat the controller is ‘blind’: it receives no feedback about the system output (in thiscase the speed of rotation) which it is trying to control. MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 864
FIGURE  35.6 A further improvement on the DC motor modelInput (v)Output (s)
s = 100vMax. speed
TABLE 35.2 Translating the model in Figure 35.6 into a lookup table
Radar rotation speed (RPM) DAC setting (8-bit)
00
26 1
4 102
6 150
8 215
10 255www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 890 ---
Consider the equivalent closed-loop version of the radar application (Figure 35.8).
The key feature of this form of controller is the feedback loop (see Figure 35.9). Thisallows the system to respond effectively – for example – to external disturbances suchas changes in wind speed or direction.
What closed-loop algorithm should you use?
There are numerous possible control algorithms that can be employed in the boxmarked ‘closed-loop controller’ in Figure 35.9 and the development and evaluation ofnew algorithms is an active area of research in many universities. A detailed discus-sion of some of the possible algorithms available is given by Nise (1995), Dutton et al.
(1997) and Dorf and Bishop (1998).PID CONTROLLER 865
FIGURE  35.7 Taking the open-loop radar control system to its logical extremeRadar
speed
controllerWind speed
sensorWind speedUser Interface
(ADC)
Wind direction
sensorRequired speed
of rotation
Wind directionDC motor
interface
(DAC)New speed
settings
FIGURE  35.8 Controlling the speed of rotation of a radar in an air-traffic application (closed-loop version)Radar
speed
controllerSpeed
sensorCurrent speed
of rotation
User
interface
(ACC)DC motor
interface
(DAC)New speed
settings
Required speed
of rotationCurrent speed
of rotationwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 891 ---
Despite the range of algorithms available, proportional-integral-differential (PID)
control is found to be very effective in many cases and, as such, it is generally consid-ered the ‘standard’ against which alternative algorithms are judged. Without doubt, itis the most widely used control algorithm in the world at the present time.
Solution
In this section we consider how to implement a PID-based control algorithm using amicrocontroller.
What is PID control?
If you open a textbook on control theory, you will encounter a description of PIDcontrol containing an equation similar to that shown in Figure 35.10.
This may appear rather complex, but can – in fact – be implemented very simply, if
you understand what the algorithm is trying to achieve.
For example, here is a complete PID control algorithm:
// Proportional term  
Change_in_controller_output = PID_KP * Error;
// Integral term
Sum += Error;Change_in_controller_output += PID_KI * Sum;
// Differential term
Change_in_controller_output += (PID_KD * SAMPLE_RATE * (Error - Old_error));MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 866
FIGURE  35.9 A schematic representation of a closed-loop control systemOpen-loop
controllerControlled
systemActual
outputDesired
output
FIGURE  35.10 One representation of the PID control algorithmTTDTDTDu(k) = u(k– 1) + K [(1 +      +       )e (k) – (1 + 2       )e (k– 1) +      e (k– 2) ] TITT T
where:
u(k) is the signal sent to the plant and e (k) is the error signal, both at sample k
Tis the sample period (in seconds) and 1/T is the sample rate (in Hz)
Kis the proportional gain
1/TIis the integral gain
TDis the derivative gainwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 892 ---
The algorithm has three components: the proportional component, the integral
component and the differential component.
We will consider initially only the proportional term. As we will see, the propor-
tional term makes up the main part of the control algorithm; indeed, this term aloneis sufficient to produce many efficient, closed-loop control systems: these are some-times referred to as P-only controllers . As we will see, the integral and differential
terms may be used, if required, to ‘fine-tune’ the basic P-only response.
To understand the operation of this algorithm, suppose you are driving a car on a
motorway and controlling the speed using only the accelerator (‘gas’) pedal. If youwere currently travelling at 30 mph and wish to increase the speed to 35 mph, youwould press the pedal gently; if you wished to increase the speed to 70 mph, youwould press the pedal more vigorously.
This is the basis of ‘proportional’ control. Specifically, we measure the ‘error’
between the desired system output (the current speed of the vehicle in this example)and the current system output (the desired speed). The difference (desired speed – cur-rent speed) is the error and P-only algorithm seeks to reduce this error to 0. Thealgorithm does this by changing the controller output (the pedal setting, in ourexample) by an amount proportional to the error term.
Thus, the proportional term in our PID controller may be implemented as follows:
Change_in_controller_output = PID_KP * Error;
where PID_KP is the ‘proportional gain’ which is adjusted, by the user, to adapt the
general algorithm to match the needs of a particular application.
A complete implementation of a PID control algorithm is given in Listing 35.1. We
will explore the impact of the I and D terms later.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_f1.C (v1.00)------------------------------------------------------------------Simple PID control implementation. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "PID_f1.h"// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define PID_KP (0.70f)      // Proportional gain   
#define PID_KI (0.03f)      // Integral gain          #define PID_KD (0.04f)      // Differential gain  
#define PID_MAX (0.5f)      // Maximum PID controller output
#define PID_MIN (0.0f)      // Minimum PID controller output
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------PID CONTROLLER 867www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 893 ---
static float Sum_G;       // Integrator component
static float Old_error_G; // Previous error value
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_Control()Simple floating-point version.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
float PID_Control(float Error, float Control_old)
{// Proportional term   float Control_new = Control_old + (PID_KP * Error);
// Integral term
Sum_G += Error;Control_new += PID_KI * Sum_G;
// Differential term
Control_new += (PID_KD * SAMPLE_RATE * (Error – Old_error_G));
// Control_new cannot exceed PID_MAX or fall below PID_MIN    
if (Control_new > PID_MAX) 
{Control_new = PID_MAX; }
else
{if (Control_new < PID_MIN) 
{Control_new = PID_MIN; }
}    
// Store error value
Old_error_G = Error;
return Control_new;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.1 A complete implementation of the PID control algorithmMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 868www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 894 ---
Dealing with ‘windup’
While the algorithm shown in Listing 35.1 will work, it can be improved with one
minor change to the integral element.
Note how this element is implemented:
Sum_G += Error;
Control_new += PID_KI * Sum_G;
One problem that frequently arises in a real system is that, at times, the actuator will
be operating at its maximum (or minimum) limit; for example, the PWM unit may beoperating at 100%. Under these circumstances, the actuator cannot be increased (ordecreased), and changing the value of Sum_G will serve no useful purpose; on the con-
trary, it will make the system response sluggish when the source of the error is removed.
We can improve the system performance by halting the update of Sum_G when the
system reaches an actuator limit. This facility is called ‘anti-windup’. 
The PID implementation in Listing 35.2 includes this form of windup protection.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_wf1.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple PID control implementation, with anti-windup protection. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "PID_wf1.h"
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------
#define PID_KP (0.2f) // Proportional gain  
#define PID_KI (0.01f) // Integral gain          #define PID_KD (0.03f) // Differential gain  
#define PID_WINDUP_PROTECTION (1) // Set to TRUE (1) or FALSE (0)#define PID_MAX (1.0f) // Maximum PID controller output
#define PID_MIN (0.0f) // Minimum PID controller output
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------
static float Sum_G;       // Integrator component
static float Old_error_G; // Previous error value
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_Control()Simple floating-point version.
See text for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/PID CONTROLLER 869www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 895 ---
float PID_Control(float Error, float Control_old)
{// Proportional term   float Control_new = Control_old + (PID_KP * Error);
// Integral term
Sum_G += Error;Control_new += PID_KI * Sum_G;
// Differential term
Control_new += (PID_KD * SAMPLE_RATE * (Error – Old_error_G));
// Optional windup protection – see text                               
if (PID_WINDUP_PROTECTION)
{ if ((Control_new > PID_MAX) || (Control_new < PID_MIN)) 
{Sum_G -= Error;  // Don't increase Sum... }
}
// Control_new cannot exceed PID_MAX or fall below PID_MIN    
if (Control_new > PID_MAX) 
{Control_new = PID_MAX; }
else
{if (Control_new < PID_MIN) 
{Control_new = PID_MIN; }
}    
// Store error value
Old_error_G = Error;
return Control_new;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE ------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.2 A complete implementation of the PID control algorithm, with windup
protectionMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 870www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 896 ---
Choosing the controller parameters
Two aspects of PID control algorithms deter new users. The first is that the algorithm
is seen to be ‘complex’: as we have demonstrated already, this is a fallacy, since PIDcontrollers can be very simply implemented.
The second concern lies with the tuning of the controller parameters. Fortunately,
such concerns are, again, often exaggerated. 
We suggest the use of the following methodology to tune the PID parameters:
1Set the integral (KI) and differential (KD) terms to 0.
2Increase the proportional term (KP) slowly, until you get continuous oscillations.
3Reduce KP to half the value determined.
4If necessary, experiment with small values of KD to damp-out ‘ringing’ in theresponse.
5If necessary, experiment with small values of KI to reduce the steady-state error inthe system.
6Always use windup protection if using a non-zero KI value.
Note that steps 1–3 of this technique are a simplified version of the Ziegler–Nichols
guide to PID tuning; these date from the 1940s (see Ziegler and Nichols, 1942; Zieglerand Nichols, 1943).
We illustrate this approach in a following example.
What sample rate?
In Chapter 32, we discussed the selection of appropriate sample rates for signal-processing systems and demonstrated the effect of aliasing that result when too low asample rate is used. Specifically, we argued that the sample rate had to be at leasttwice the system bandwidth and that this bandwidth was dictated by the maximumfrequency component in the system we were analyzing. Thus, to process a speechsignal containing components up to 4 kHz, we would need to sample at a minimumof 8 kHz and remove any higher frequencies with an anti-aliasing filter. Determiningthe required bandwidth of such an application will typically be carried out using aspectrum analyzer.
Determining the required sample rate for a control system must be carried out in a
slightly different way. One effective technique involves the measurement of thesystem rise time (Figure 35.11). This is an open-loop test that involves, for example,having an engine running at minimum speed then – having fully opened the throttle– measuring how long the system takes to reach maximum speed. 
Having determined the rise time (measured in seconds), we can – making some
simplifying assumptions – calculate the required sample frequency as follows:
6Sample frequency = Rise timePID CONTROLLER 871www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 897 ---
Here the sample rate is in Hertz and the rise time in seconds. Thus, if the rise
time measured in Figure 35.11 were 0.10 seconds, the required sample frequencywould be 6 Hz.
This assumes that the bandwidth is approximately 20 times the systems natural
frequency: this is a reasonable assumption. (Please see Franklin et al., 1994, for
further details.)
Hardware resource implications
Implementation of a PID control algorithm requires some floating-point or integermathematical operations. The precise load will vary with the implementation used,but a typical implementation requires four multiplications, three additions and twosubtractions. With floating-point operations, this amounts to a total of approximately2,000 instructions (using the Keil compiler, on an 8051 without hardware maths sup-port). This operation can be carried out every millisecond on a standard (12 osc /instruction) 8051 running at 24 MHz, if there is no other CPU-intensive processing tobe done. 
A one-millisecond loop time is more than adequate for most control applications,
which typically require sample intervals of several hundred milliseconds or longer. Ofcourse, if you require higher performance, many more modern implementations ofthe 8051 microcontroller can provide this. For example, a Dallas 520 microcontroller(at 32 MHz) will execute the PID implementation just outlined within 0.25 ms.Similarly, devices such as the Infineon 517 and 509, which have hardware maths sup-port, will also execute this code rapidly, should this be required.
Safety and reliability implications
Any device that controls a dangerous actuator (such as a high-powered motor orrobotic mechanism) has safety implications. Any algorithm used to control such aload must be treated with caution.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 872
FIGURE  35.11 Measuring the rise time of a systemInputOutput
Rise timewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 898 ---
Portability
The PID algorithms discussed here can be used with any microcontroller or micro-
processor family.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Suitable for many single-input single-output (SISO) systems.
Generally effective.Easy to implement.Not suitable for use in multi-input or multi-output applications.Parameter tuning can be time consuming.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
In this section we consider some possible alternatives to PID control.
Why open-loop controllers are still (sometimes) useful
In ‘Background’ we suggested that closed-loop control is always a better alternative
than open-loop control. This is an over-simplification.
Open-loop control still has a role to play. For example, if we wish to control the
speed of an electric fan in an automotive air-conditioning system, we may not needprecise speed control and an open-loop approach might be appropriate.
In addition, it is not always possible to measure the quantity we are trying to
control directly, making closed-loop control impractical. For example, in an insulindelivery system used for patients with diabetes, we are seeking to control levels of glu-cose in the bloodstream. However, glucose sensors are not available, so an open-loopcontroller must be used (see Dorf and Bishop (1998, p. 22) for further details).
Similar problems apply throughout much of the process industry, where sensors
are not available to determine product quality.
Limitations of PID control
PID control is only suitable for ‘single-input single-output’ (SISO) systems or forsystems that can be broken down into SISO components. PID control is not suitablefor systems with multiple inputs and / or multiple outputs. In addition, even for SISOsystems, PID can only control a single system parameter, and is not suitable for multi-parameter (sometimes called multi-variable) systems.
Please refer to Franklin et al. (1994), Nise (1995), Dutton et al. (1997), Dorf and
Bishop (1998) and Franklin et al. (1998) for further discussions on multi-input, multi-
output and multi-parameter control algorithms.PID CONTROLLER 873www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 899 ---
Fuzzy control
The texts mentioned highlight traditional (mathematically based) approaches to the
design of control systems. A less formal approach to control system design hasemerged recently: this is known as ‘fuzzy control’ and is suitable for SISO, MISO andMIMO systems, with one or more parameters. (Refer to Passino and Yurkovich, 1998,for further information on fuzzy control.)
Example: Tuning the parameters of a cruise-control system
In this example, we take a simple computer simulation of a vehicle, and develop anappropriate cruise-control system to match.
The model is given in Listing 35.3.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Cruise.CPP (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Desktop C++ program to demonstrate PID control.Cruise-control application using simple vehicle model.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include <iostream.h>
#include <fstream.h>#include <math.h>#include "PID_f1.h"
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define MS_to_MPH (2.2369) // Convert metres/sec to miles per hour#define FRIC (50) // Friction coeff- Newton Second / Metre 
#define MASS (1000) // Mass of vehicle (kgs)#define N_SAMPLES (1000) // Number of samples#define ENGINE_POWER (5000) // N  #define DESIRED_SPEED (31.3f) // Metres/sec [* 2.2369 to convert to mph] 
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
int main()
{float Throttle = 0.313f;  // Throttle setting (fraction)float Old_speed = DESIRED_SPEED, Old_throttle = 0.313f; float Speed, Accel; MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 874www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 900 ---
float Dist;
float Sum = 0.0f;  
float Error;// Open file to store results
fstream out_FP;out_FP.open("pid.txt", ios::out);   
if (!out_FP)
{cerr << "ERROR: Cannot open an essential file.";return 1; }
for (int t = 0; t < N_SAMPLES; t++)
{// Error drives the controller Error = (DESIRED_SPEED – Old_speed);
// Calculate throttle setting
Throttle = PID_Control(Error, Throttle);// Throttle = 0.313f; // Use for open-loop demo
// Simple car model
Accel = (float)(Throttle * ENGINE_POWER – (FRIC * Old_speed)) / MASS;
Dist = Old_speed + Accel * (1.0f / SAMPLE_RATE);
Speed = (float) sqrt((Old_speed * Old_speed) + (2 * Accel * Dist));
// Disturbances
if (t == 50)
{Speed = 35.8f;  // Sudden gust of wind into rear of car}
if (t == 550)
{Speed = 26.8f;  // Sudden gust of wind into front of car}
// Display speed in miles per hour
cout   << Speed * MS_to_MPH << endl;out_FP << Speed * MS_to_MPH << endl;
// Ready for next loop
Old_speed = Speed;Old_throttle = Throttle;}PID CONTROLLER 875www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 901 ---
return 0;
}  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.3 A simple model of a vehicle to be used to illustrate the design of a 
cruise-control system
We can illustrate the basic operation of this model by demonstrating it running in
open-loop mode (Figure 35.12).
In Figure 35.12, the car is controlled by maintaining a fixed throttle position at all
times. Because we assume the vehicle is driving on a straight, flat, road with no wind,the speed is constant (70 mph) for most of the 1,000-second trip. There are, however,two exceptions. At time t = 50 seconds, we simulate a sudden gust of wind at the rearof the car; this speeds the vehicle up and it slowly returns to the set speed value.Similarly, at time t = 550 seconds, we simulate a sharp gust of wind at the front of thecar; this slows the vehicle down.
We will now go through the process of tuning a PID control algorithm that will
allow the vehicle to recover its required speed more rapidly in the event of such dis-turbances. The PID algorithm we will use is given in Listing 35.2.
As outlined in ‘Solution’, we will tune this algorithm by applying the following
methodology:
1Set integral (KI) and differential (KD) terms to 0.
2Increase the proportional term (KP) slowly, until we get continuous oscillations.
3Reduce KP to half the value determined.
4If necessary, experiment with small values of KD to damp-out ‘ringing’ inthe response.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 876
FIGURE  35.12 Running the cruise-control application in open-loop mode55657585
1
29
5785
113
141169197225253
281
309337366393421449477505533561
589
617645673701729757785813841869897925953981Speed (mph)
Time (seconds)[NO CONTROLLER – open loop]www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 902 ---
5If necessary, experiment with small values of KI to reduce the steady-state error in
the system.
6Always use windup protection if using a non-zero KI value.
Figure 35.13 shows the first test.
#define PID_KP (0.20f)
#define PID_KI (0.00f)#define PID_KD (0.00f)
Figure 35.14 shows the result of steadily increasing the value of KP, until we get
small, constant, oscillations.
#define PID_KP (1.00f)
#define PID_KI (0.00f)#define PID_KD (0.00f)
The results of this experiment suggest that a value of KP = 0.5 will be appropriate
(that is, half the value used to generate the constant oscillations). This value is illus-trated in Figure 35.15.PID CONTROLLER 877
FIGURE  35.13 Tuning the controller
55657585
1
29
5785
113
141169197225253
281
309337366393421449477505533561
589
617645673701729757785813841869
897
925953981Speed (mph)
Time (seconds)
FIGURE  35.14 Tuning the controller
55657585
1
29
5785
113
141169197225253
281
309337366393421449477505533561
589
617645673701729757785813841869
897
925953981Speed (mph)
Time (seconds)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 903 ---
#define PID_KP (0.50f)
#define PID_KI (0.00f)#define PID_KD (0.00f)
This response might be considered adequate for a basic cruise-control application;
however, the guidelines already given suggest that we should be able to reducethe transient ringing effect (after each disturbance) by use of an appropriate differen-tial term. Some brief experiments suggest that the parameters used in Figure 35.16are appropriate.
#define PID_KP (0.50f)
#define PID_KI (0.00f)#define PID_KD (0.10f)
Note that, with these parameters, the system reaches the required speed within a
few seconds of each disturbance; you may like to compare this, again, with the origi-nal open-loop version shown in Figure 35.12.
Note also that we can reduce the system complexity here by omitting the integral
term and using this PD controller.MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 878
FIGURE  35.15 Tuning the controller
55657585
1
29
5785
113
141169197225253
281
309337366393421449477505533561
589
617645673701729757785813841869
897
925953981Speed (mph)
Time (seconds)
FIGURE  35.16 Tuning the controller55657585
1
29
5785
113
141169197225253
281
309337366393421449477505533561
589
617645673701729757785813841869
897
925953981Speed (mph)
Time (seconds)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 904 ---
Example: DC motor speed control
The previous example is based on a computer simulation. In this example, we demon-
strate closed-loop control of a real DC motor.
The motor is controlled via a PWM interface (Figure 35.17); to allow closed-loop
control an encoder is mounted on the motor shaft: this generates one pulse everytime the shaft rotates.
The key source files required in the application can be found in Listings 35.3 to
35.6: all the files for this project are included on the CD.
Note that this example uses a different, integer-based PID implementation. As we
discussed in ‘Hardware resource implications’, integer-based solutions impose a lowerCPU load than floating-point equivalents. 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project PIDmotor
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayedPID CONTROLLER 879
FIGURE  35.17 Hardware for controlling the speed of a DC motor8051 deviceOptical encoder connected here
(mounted on motor shaft)
P1.1M+12V
IRF540 (or similar)
74LS06
0VP3.51K–10K
Logic 0 (0v) to turn motorwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 905 ---
// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED
#define Error_port P5
#endif// ------ PIDmotor.C -----------------------------------------------// ADC reading from Pin 6.0
// PWM output on Pin 1.1
// Opto-encoder (or similar) connected to this pin
sbit Pulse_count_pin = P3^5;                      
// ------ Lnk_O.C -----------------------------------------------// Pin 3.1 used for RS-232 interface
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.4 Part of an example illustrating PID control of a DC motor
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Motor (speed) control demonstrator.PI algorithm.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "1_01_12g.h"
#include "PIDMotor.h"
#include "Lnk_O_B.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{   SCH_Init_T1(); // Set up the schedulerPID_MOTOR_Init();MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 880www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 906 ---
// Set baud rate to 9600, using internal baud rate generator
// Generic 8051 versionPC_LINK_Init_Internal(9600);
// Add a 'pulse count poll' task 
// TIMING IS IN TICKS (1ms interval)// Every 5 milliseconds (200 times per second)SCH_Add_Task(PID_MOTOR_Poll_Speed_Pulse, 1, 1);
SCH_Add_Task(PID_MOTOR_Control_Motor, 300, 1000);// Sending data to serial port
SCH_Add_Task(PC_LINK_Update, 3, 1);
// All tasks added: start running the scheduler
SCH_Start();        
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.5 Part of an example illustrating PID control of a DC motor
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_Motor.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Small library for PID control of a DC motor.
For C515c microcontroller.
The set point (required speed) is read via a potentiometer 
and on-chip ADC.
The current speed is read via an optical encoder.  The pulses
from the encoder are counted using T0.
The new speed is set by PWM using the on-chip capture-compare 
unit (Timer 2).
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/PID CONTROLLER 881www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 907 ---
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "PIDMotor.h"
#include "Lnk_O_B.h"
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------extern const char code CHAR_MAP_G[10];// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static tByte PID_MOTOR_Get_Required_Speed(void);
static tByte PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed(void);static void  PID_MOTOR_Set_New_PWM_Output(const tByte);
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define PULSE_HIGH (0)
#define PULSE_LOW (1)
#define PID_PROPORTIONAL (5)
#define PID_INTEGRAL     (50)#define PID_DIFFERENTIAL (50)
// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// Used for demo purposes only
tWord Ticks = 0;
// Stores the latest count value
static tByte Pulse_count_G;
// Data to be copied to the serial port
static char PID_MOTOR_data_G[50] = {"  "};
// Measured speed, required speed and controller output variables
static tByte Speed_measured_G = 45;static tByte Speed_required_G = 50;static tByte Controller_output_G = 128;
static int Old_error_G = 0;
static int Sum_G = 0;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Init()Prepare for UD motor control.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 882www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 908 ---
void PID_MOTOR_Init(void)
{// -----------------------------------------------------------// Set up the initial data to be sent to the PC via RS-232// -----------------------------------------------------------char* pScreen_Data =  "Cur     Des     PWM     \n";
tByte c;for (c = 0; c < 30; c++)
{PID_MOTOR_data_G[c] = pScreen_Data[c];}  
// -----------------------------------------------------------
// Set up the A-D converter// (used to measure the 'set point' (the desired motor speed)// -----------------------------------------------------------
// Select internally-triggered single conversion
// Reading from P6.0 (single channel)ADCON0 = 0xC0;  // Mask bits 0 – 5 to 0 
// Select appropriate prescalar ratio: see manual for details
ADCON1 = 0x80;  // Make bit 7 = 1 : Prescaler ratio=8
// -----------------------------------------------------------
// Set up the PWM output (Cap Com) unit – T2// (used to set the desired motor speed)// -----------------------------------------------------------
// ---------- T2 Mode ---------------------------
// Mode 1 = Timerfunction
// Prescaler: Fcpu/6// ---------- T2 reload mode selection ----------
// Mode 0 = auto-reload upon timer overflow// Preset the timer register with autoreload value ! 0xFF00;TL2 = 0x00;TH2 = 0xFF;
// ---------- T2 general compare mode ----------
//  Mode 0 for all channelsT2CON |= 0x11;
// ---------- T2 general interrupts ------------
//  Timer 2 overflow interrupt is disabledPID CONTROLLER 883www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 909 ---
ET2=0;
//  Timer 2 external reload interrupt is disabledEXEN2=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 0 ---------
// Disabled??// Set Compare Register CRC on: 0xFF00;CRCL = 0x00;CRCH = 0xFF;
// CC0/ext3 interrupt is disabled
EX3=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 1 ---------
// Compare enabled// Set Compare Register CC1 on: 0xFF80;CCL1 = 0x80;CCH1 = 0xFF;
// CC1/ext4 interrupt is disabled
EX4=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 2 ---------
// Disabled// Set Compare Register CC2 on: 0x0000;CCL2 = 0x00;CCH2 = 0x00;//  CC2/ext5 interrupt is disabledEX5=0;
// ---------- Compare/capture Channel 3 ---------
// Disabled// Set Compare Register CC3 on: 0x0000;CCL3 = 0x00;CCH3 = 0x00;
// CC3/ext6 interrupt is disabled
EX6=0;
// Set all above mentioned modes for channel 0-3 
CCEN = 0x08; 
// -----------------------------------------------------------
// Count pulses on Pin 3.5 [software only]// (used to measure the current motor speed)// -----------------------------------------------------------Pulse_count_pin = 1;MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 884www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 910 ---
Pulse_count_G = 0;   
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Control_Motor()The main motor control function.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PID_MOTOR_Control_Motor(void)
{ int Error;int Control_new;
// Get the current speed value (0-255)
Speed_measured_G = PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed();
// Get the desired speed value (0-255)
Speed_required_G = PID_MOTOR_Get_Required_Speed();
if (++Ticks == 100)
{Speed_required_G = 200;}
// Difference between required and actual speed (0-255)
Error = Speed_required_G – Speed_measured_G;
// Proportional term
Control_new = Controller_output_G + (Error / PID_PROPORTIONAL);
// Integral term [SET TO 0 IF NOT REQUIRED]
if (PID_INTEGRAL)
{Sum_G += Error;Control_new += (Sum_G / (1 + PID_INTEGRAL));}
// Differential term [SET TO 0 IF NOT REQUIRED]
if (PID_DIFFERENTIAL)
{Control_new += (Error – Old_error_G) / (1 + PID_DIFFERENTIAL);
// Store error value
Old_error_G = Error;}PID CONTROLLER 885www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 911 ---
// Adjust to 8-bit range
if (Control_new > 255)
{Control_new = 255;Sum_G -= Error;  // Windup protection}
if (Control_new < 0)
{Control_new = 0;Sum_G -= Error;  // Windup protection} 
// Convert to required 8-bit format
Controller_output_G = (tByte) Control_new; 
// Update the PWM setting
PID_MOTOR_Set_New_PWM_Output(Controller_output_G);
// Update display
PID_MOTOR_data_G[4] = CHAR_MAP_G[Speed_measured_G / 100];PID_MOTOR_data_G[5] = CHAR_MAP_G[(Speed_measured_G % 100) / 10];PID_MOTOR_data_G[6] = CHAR_MAP_G[Speed_measured_G % 10];
PID_MOTOR_data_G[12] = CHAR_MAP_G[Speed_required_G / 100];
PID_MOTOR_data_G[13] = CHAR_MAP_G[(Speed_required_G % 100) / 10];PID_MOTOR_data_G[14] = CHAR_MAP_G[Speed_required_G % 10];
PID_MOTOR_data_G[20] = CHAR_MAP_G[Controller_output_G / 100];
PID_MOTOR_data_G[21] = CHAR_MAP_G[(Controller_output_G % 100) / 10];PID_MOTOR_data_G[22] = CHAR_MAP_G[Controller_output_G % 10];
PC_LINK_Write_String_To_Buffer(PID_MOTOR_data_G);
} 
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Get_Required_Speed()Get the required speed via the Pot and ADC.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte PID_MOTOR_Get_Required_Speed(void)
{// Take sample from A-D
// Write (value not important) to ADDATL to start conversion
ADDATL = 0x01; MONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 886www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 912 ---
// Wait for conversion to complete
// NOTE: This demo software has no timeout...while (BSY == 1);
// 10-bit A-D result is now available
// return 8-bit resultreturn ADDATH;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Set_New_PWM_Output()Adjust the PWM output value.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PID_MOTOR_Set_New_PWM_Output(const tByte Controller_output_G)
{// Changing value in CCL1 to generate appropriate PWM duty cycleCCL1 = Controller_output_G;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed()Schedule this function at regular intervals.Remember: max count is 65536 (16-bit counter)
– it is your responsibility to ensure this countis not exceeded.  Choose an appropriate scheduleinterval and allow a margin for error.
For high-frequency pulses, you need to take account of
the fact that the count is stop for a (very brief) period,to read the counter.  
Note: the delay before the first count is taken should 
generally be the same as the inter-count interval,to ensure that the first count is as accurate as possible.
For example, this is OK:
Sch_Add_Task(PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed, 1000, 1000);
While this will give a very low first count:
Sch_Add_Task(PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed, 0, 1000);
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/PID CONTROLLER 887www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 913 ---
tByte PID_MOTOR_Read_Current_Speed(void)
{int C;tByte Count = Pulse_count_G;
Pulse_count_G = 0;    // Normalized: 0 -> 255
C = 9 * ((int) Count – 28);
if (C < 0)
{C = 0;}
if (C > 255)
{C = 255;}
return (tByte) C;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
PID_MOTOR_Poll_Speed_Pulse()Using software to count falling edges on a specified pin
– T0 is *NOT* used here.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void PID_MOTOR_Poll_Speed_Pulse(void)
{static bit Previous_state;bit Current_state = Pulse_count_pin;
if ((Previous_state == PULSE_HIGH) && (Current_state == PULSE_LOW))
{Pulse_count_G++;}
Previous_state = Current_state;  
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 35.6 Part of an example illustrating PID control of a DC motorMONITORING AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 888www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 914 ---
Further reading
Atherton, D.P. (1999) ‘PID controller tuning’, IEE Computing & Control Engineering
Journal , 10 (2): 44–50.
Bennett, S. (1994) Real-time Computer Control , 2nd edn, Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Daley, S. and Liu, G.P. (1999) ‘Optimal PID tuning using direct search algorithms’, IEE
Computing & Control Engineering Journal , 10 (2): 51–6.
Dorf, R.C. and Bishop, R.H. (1998) Modern Control Systems , 8th edn, Addison-Wesley,
CA.
Doyle, F.J., Gatzke, E.P. and Parker, R.S. (1999) Process Control Modules: A Software
Laboratory for Control Design: The MATLAB-based Process Control Guide for ChemicalEngineering Professionals , Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
Dutton, K., Thompson, S. and Barraclough, B. (1997) The Art of Control Engineering ,
Addison-Wesley Reading, MA.
Franklin, G.F., Powell, J.D., and Emami-Naeini, A. (1994) Feedback Control of Dynamic
Systems , 3rd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Franklin, G.F., Powell, J.D., and Workman, M. (1998) Digital Control of Dynamic
Systems , 3rd edn, Addison-Wesley, CA.
Nise, N.S. (1995) Control Systems Engineering , 2nd edn, Addison-Wesley, CA.
Passino, K.M. and Yurkovich, S. (1998) Fuzzy Control , Addison-Wesley, CA.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1942) ‘Optimal setting for automatic controllers’,
Trans. ASME , 64 (11), 759–68.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1943) ‘Process lags in automatic control circuits’,
Trans. ASME , 65 (5), 433–44.PID CONTROLLER 889www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 915 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 916 ---
Specialized time-triggered
architectures
We conclude the collection of patterns in this book by considering four specialized sched-
ulers. These are all co-operative in nature, but are adapted to meet the needs of particularapplications where, for example, low power consumption or very accurate schedulertiming are required.
More specifically:
GIn Chapter 36, we consider ways of maintaining the advantages of the scheduledarchitecture while reducing the CPU and / or memory load it imposes.
GIn Chapter 37, we discuss simple and cost-effective techniques for improving thestability of the scheduler timing in the face of inevitable fluctuations in ambienttemperature.part hwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 917 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 918 ---
Reducing the system overheads
Introduction
In this chapter, we consider some of the ways in which the flexible nature of the gen-
eral-purpose schedulers presented in this book may be exploited, in order to createspecial-purpose schedulers adapted for the needs of particular applications.
The following patterns are presented in this chapter:
G255- TICK SCHEDULER [page 894]
A scheduler designed to run multiple tasks, but with reduced memory (and CPU)
overheads. This scheduler operates in the same way as the standard co-operativeschedulers, but all information is stored in byte-sized (rather than word-sized) vari-ables: this reduces the required memory for each task by around 30%.
GONE-TASK SCHEDULER [page 911]
A stripped-down, co-operative scheduler able to manage a single task. This very
simple scheduler makes very efficient use of hardware resources, with the bare min-imum of CPU and memory overheads. 
GONE-YEAR SCHEDULER [page 919]
A scheduler designed for very low-power operation: specifically, it is designed to
form the basis of battery-powered applications capable of operating for a year ormore from a small, low-cost battery supply.chapter 36www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 919 ---
255- TICK SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you reduce the scheduler memory requirements?
Background
—
Solution
As we discussed in Chapter 14, the majority of the schedulers in this book are basedon the following data structure:
// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access  
// Total memory per task is 7 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a 'void (void)' function)void (code * pTask)(void);  
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Delay;       
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstWord Period;       
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe;       } sTask; 
This data structure allows initial task delays and task intervals of up to 65,535 ticks.
In doing so, it requires a total of seven bytes of memory per task.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 894www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 920 ---
The 255-tick scheduler data structure is slightly modified:
// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access  
// Total memory per task is 5 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a 'void (void)' function)void (code * pTask)(void);  
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstByte Delay;       
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstByte Period;       
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe;       } sTask; 
This data structure allows initial task delays and task intervals of up to 255 ticks. In
doing so, it requires a total of five bytes of memory per task.
Hardware resource implications
In addition to the significant memory savings, use of this scheduler also provides aslight performance improvement, since the processor can manipulate the 8-bit vari-ables in the 255-tick scheduler more rapidly than the 16-bit variables in theconventional version.
Reliability and safety implications
This scheduler has all the reliability and safety features of the co-operative schedulerswe have discussed throughout this book.
Portability
This scheduler is as portable as the other co-operative schedulers discussed through-out this book.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Provides a co-operative scheduling environment.
Reduced memory requirements (compared with CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
[page 255]).255-TICK SCHEDULER 895www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 921 ---
Slightly reduced CPU loading.
Limited (255-tick) initial delays and task intervals.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
See CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255].
Example: A generic 255-tick scheduler
We provide a complete example of a generic 255-tick scheduler in Listings 36.1 to 36.8.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project SCH_255 (see Chap 36)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ LED_Flas.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]sbit LED_pin = P1^5;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.1 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 896www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 922 ---
Demonstration program for:
Generic 255-tick scheduler using T2.Assumes 12 MHz oscillator (-> 05 ms tick interval).*** All timing is in TICKS (not milliseconds) ***Required linker options (see Chapter 14 for details):OVERLAY (main ~ (LED_Flash_Update), 
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks ! (LED_Flash_Update))
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "2_05_12g.h" #include "LED_flas.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Prepare for the 'Flash_LED' task
LED_Flash_Init();
// Add the 'Flash LED' task (on for ~1000 ms, off for ~1000 ms)
// - timings are in ticks (5 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is *** 255 *** ticks)SCH_Add_Task(LED_Flash_Update, 0, 200);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.2 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example255-TICK SCHEDULER 897www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 923 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_05_12g.h (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see 2_05_12g.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "SCH51a.H"
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
void SCH_Init_T2(void);
void SCH_Start(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.3 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_05_12g.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A 255-TICK SCHEDULER FOR STANDARD 8051 / 8052 ***
*** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 5 ms (precise) tick interval ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "2_05_12g.h"// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.C)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 898www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 924 ---
SCH_Init_T2()
Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;  
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reload
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.005 seconds (5 ms)// - this takes 5000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 5000 = 60536 (dec) = 0xEC78
TH2    = 0xEC;  // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xEC;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2    = 0x78;  // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x78;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
// Start timer   
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.255-TICK SCHEDULER 899www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 925 ---
NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Update()This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in SCH_Init().This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. // NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Increment the run flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 900www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 926 ---
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;
}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.4 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH51a.h (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- see SCH51a.C for details
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#ifndef _SCH51_H
#define _SCH51_H
#include "Main.h"// ------ Public data type declarations ----------------------------// Store in DATA area, if possible, for rapid access  
// Total memory per task is 5 bytestypedef data struct 
{// Pointer to the task (must be a 'void (void)' function)void (code * pTask)(void);  
// Delay (ticks) until the function will (next) be run
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstByte Delay;       
// Interval (ticks) between subsequent runs.
// - see SCH_Add_Task() for further detailstByte Period;       
// Incremented (by scheduler) when task is due to execute
tByte RunMe;       } sTask; 255-TICK SCHEDULER 901www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 927 ---
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------
// Core scheduler functions
void  SCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void);tByte SCH_Add_Task(void (code*) (void), const tByte, const tByte);  bit   SCH_Delete_Task(const tByte);void  SCH_Report_Status(void);
// ------ Public constants -----------------------------------------// The maximum number of tasks required at any one time
// during the execution of the program//// MUST BE ADJUSTED FOR EACH NEW PROJECT#define SCH_MAX_TASKS   (1)   
#endif/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.5 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH51a.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THESE ARE THE CORE SCHEDULER FUNCTIONS ****** 255-TICK VERSION ***--- These functions may be used with all 8051 devices ---*** SCH_MAX_TASKS *must* be set by the user ***
--- see "Sch51.h" ---
*** Includes power-saving mode ***
--- You *MUST* confirm that the power-down mode is adapted ------ to match your chosen device (usually only necessary with --- Extended 8051s, such as c515c, c509, etc ---
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"
#include "Sch51a.h"SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 902www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 928 ---
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------
// The array of tasks
sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// Used to display the error code
// See Main.H for details of error codes// See Port.H for details of the error porttByte Error_code_G = 0;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------static void SCH_Go_To_Sleep(void);// ------ Private variables ----------------------------------------// Keeps track of time since last error was recorded (see below)
static tWord Error_tick_count_G;
// The code of the last error (reset after ~1 minute)
static tByte Last_error_code_G;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Dispatch_Tasks()This is the 'dispatcher' function.  When a task (function)
is due to run, SCH_Dispatch_Tasks() will run it.This function must be called (repeatedly) from the main loop.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Dispatch_Tasks(void) 
{tByte Index;
// Dispatches (runs) the next task (if one is ready)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe > 0) 
{(*SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)();  // Run the task
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe -= 1;   // Reset / reduce RunMe flag// Periodic tasks will automatically run again
// - if this is a 'one shot' task, remove it from the arrayif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period == 0)
{SCH_Delete_Task(Index);255-TICK SCHEDULER 903www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 929 ---
}
}
}
// Report system status
SCH_Report_Status();  
// The scheduler enters idle mode at this point 
SCH_Go_To_Sleep();          }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Add_Task()Causes a task (function) to be executed at regular intervals 
or after a user-defined delay
Fn_P   - The name of the function which is to be scheduled.
NOTE: All scheduled functions must be 'void, void' -that is, they must take no parameters, and have a void return type. 
DELAY  - The interval (TICKS) before the task is first executedPERIOD - If 'PERIOD' is 0, the function is only called once,
at the time determined by 'DELAY'.  If PERIOD is non-zero,then the function is called repeatedly at an intervaldetermined by the value of PERIOD (see below for exampleswhich should help clarify this).
RETURN VALUE:  
Returns the position in the task array at which the task has been 
added.  If the return value is SCH_MAX_TASKS then the task could not be added to the array (there was insufficient space).  If thereturn value is < SCH_MAX_TASKS, then the task was added successfully.  
Note: this return value may be required, if a task is
to be subsequently deleted - see SCH_Delete_Task().
EXAMPLES:Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,1000,0);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed once after 1000 sch ticks.    
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,0,1000);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 schticks.            SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 904www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 930 ---
Task_ID = SCH_Add_Task(Do_X,300,1000);
Causes the function Do_X() to be executed regularly, every 1000 ticks.Task will be first executed at T = 300 ticks, then 1300, 2300, etc.     
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
tByte SCH_Add_Task(void (code * pFunction)(), 
const tByte DELAY, const tByte PERIOD)    
{tByte Index = 0;
// First find a gap in the array (if there is one)
while ((SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask != 0) && (Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS))
{Index++;} 
// Have we reached the end of the list?   
if (Index == SCH_MAX_TASKS)
{// Task list is full//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_TOO_MANY_TASKS;
// Also return an error code
return SCH_MAX_TASKS;  }
// If we're here, there is a space in the task array
SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask  = pFunction;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay  = DELAY;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period = PERIOD;
SCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe  = 0;return Index; // return position of task (to allow later deletion)
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Delete_Task()Removes a task from the scheduler.  Note that this does
*not* delete the associated function from memory: it simply means that it is no longer called by the scheduler. 255-TICK SCHEDULER 905www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 931 ---
TASK_INDEX - The task index.  Provided by SCH_Add_Task(). 
RETURN VALUE:  RETURN_ERROR or RETURN_NORMAL
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
bit SCH_Delete_Task(const tByte TASK_INDEX) 
{bit Return_code;
if (SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask == 0)
{// No task at this location...//// Set the global error variableError_code_G = ERROR_SCH_CANNOT_DELETE_TASK;
// ...also return an error code
Return_code = RETURN_ERROR;}
else
{Return_code = RETURN_NORMAL;}      
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].pTask  = 0x0000;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Delay   = 0;SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].Period  = 0;
SCH_tasks_G[TASK_INDEX].RunMe   = 0;return Return_code;       // return status
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Report_Status()Simple function to display error codes.This version displays code on a port with attached LEDs:
adapt, if required, to report errors over serial link, etc.
Errors are only displayed for a limited period 
(60000 ticks = 1 minute at 1ms tick interval).After this the the error code is reset to 0. 
This code may be easily adapted to display the last
error 'for ever': this may be appropriate in yourapplication.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 906www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 932 ---
See Chapter 10 for further information.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Report_Status(void)
{
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// ONLY APPLIES IF WE ARE REPORTING ERRORS// Check for a new error codeif (Error_code_G != Last_error_code_G)
{// Negative logic on LEDs assumedError_port = 255 - Error_code_G;
Last_error_code_G = Error_code_G;if (Error_code_G != 0)
{Error_tick_count_G = 60000;}
else
{Error_tick_count_G = 0;}
}
else
{if (Error_tick_count_G != 0)
{if (--Error_tick_count_G == 0)
{Error_code_G = 0; // Reset error code}
}
}
#endif
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Go_To_Sleep()This scheduler enters 'idle mode' between clock ticks
to save power.  The next clock tick will return the processorto the normal operating state.255-TICK SCHEDULER 907www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 933 ---
Note: a slight performance improvement is possible if this
function is implemented as a macro, or if the code here is simply pasted into the 'dispatch' function.  
However, by making this a function call, it becomes easier 
- during development - to assess the performance of the scheduler, using the 'performance analyser' in the Keil hardware simulator. See Chapter 14 for examples of this. 
*** May wish to disable this if using a watchdog ****** ADAPT AS REQUIRED FOR YOUR HARDWARE ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Go_To_Sleep()
{PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (generic 8051 version)
// Entering idle mode requires TWO consecutive instructions 
// on 80c515 / 80c505 - to avoid accidental triggering//PCON |= 0x01;    // Enter idle mode (#1)//PCON |= 0x20;    // Enter idle mode (#2)}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.6 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
- See LED_flas.C for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Public function prototypes -------------------------------void LED_Flash_Init(void);
void LED_Flash_Update(void);
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.7 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler exampleSPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 908www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 934 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_flas.C (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple 'Flash LED' test function for scheduler.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
#include "Port.h"#include "LED_flas.h"
// ------ Private variable definitions -----------------------------static bit LED_state_G;/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Must schedule at twice the required flash rate: thus, for 1 Hz
flash (on for 0.5 seconds, off for 0.5 seconds) must scheduleat 2 Hz.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Update(void)
{// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)if (LED_state_G == 1)
{LED_state_G = 0;LED_pin = 0;}
else255-TICK SCHEDULER 909www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 935 ---
{
LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.8 Part of a generic 255-tick scheduler example
Further reading
—SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 910www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 936 ---
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application is to have a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you create an application that is required to run only a single task, using aminimum of memory and CPU resources?
Background
—
Solution
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] can be used as the basis of single-task applica-
tions and we have frequently used it for this purpose. However, sometimes you have asimple application and need to squeeze all you can from the limited CPU andmemory resources available in an 8051 microcontroller; in these circumstances, use ofa full-blown co-operative scheduler environment may not be appropriate.
There is a simple solution that is compatible with the majority of the patterns in
this book: this involves basing your application on a single task and calling this taskdirectly by implementing is as a timer ISR.
Listing 36.9 illustrates the approach.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simple timer ISR demonstration program
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include <AT89S53.h>#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5// Function prototype
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_2_Init(void);ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 911www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 937 ---
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void main(void)
{Timer_2_Init();  // Set up Timer 2
EA = 1;          // Globally enable interrupts
while(1);        // An empty Super Loop
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_2_Init(void)
{// Timer 2 is configured as a 16-bit timer,// which is automatically reloaded when it overflows//// This code (generic 8051/52) assumes a 12 MHz system osc.  // The Timer 2 resolution is then 1.000 µs// (see Chapter 11 for details)//// Reload value is FC18 (hex) = 64536 (decimal)// Timer (16-bit) overflows when it reaches 65536 (decimal)// Thus, with these setting, timer will overflow every 1 msT2CON   = 0x04;   // Load Timer 2 control registerT2MOD   = 0x00;   // Load Timer 2 mode register
TH2     = 0xFC;   // Load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H  = 0xFC;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. high byteTL2     = 0x18;   // Load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L  = 0x18;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. low byte
// Timer 2 interrupt is enabled, and ISR will be called 
// whenever the timer overflows - see below.ET2     = 1;
// Start Timer 2 running
TR2   = 1;        }
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void X(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 1 msSPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 912www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 938 ---
// Place required code here...
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.9 The framework of an application using a timer ISR to invoke a regular task
Hardware resource implications
We consider the hardware resource implications under three main headings: timers,
memory and CPU load.
Timer
This pattern requires one hardware timer.  If possible, this should be a 16-bit timer,with auto-reload capabilities (such as Timer 2).
Memory and CPU load
The scheduler will consume no significant CPU resources: short of implementing theapplication as a 
SUPER LOOP [page 162] (with all the disadvantages of this rudimen-
tary architecture), there is generally no more efficient way of implementing yourapplication in a high-level language.
Reliability and safety implications
This approach can be both safe and reliable, provided that you do not attempt to‘shoe-horn’ a multitask design into this single-task framework.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
An efficient environment for running a single task at regular intervals.
Only appropriate for applications which can be implemented cleanly using a
single task.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
The main alternative to this ‘slim’ scheduler is a SUPER LOOP [page 162] architecture.
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER can be particularly effective if used in combination with
MULTI -STATE TASK [page 322].ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 913www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 939 ---
Example: Assessing the load of a one-task scheduler
We illustrate the use of a one-task scheduler in Listings 36.10 and 36.11.  
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Port.H (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------'Port Header' (see Chap 10) for the project ONE_TASK (see Chap 36)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
// ------ Sch51.C ----------------------------------------// Comment this line out if error reporting is NOT required
//#define SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
#ifdef SCH_REPORT_ERRORS
// The port on which error codes will be displayed// ONLY USED IF ERRORS ARE REPORTED#define Error_port P1
#endif// ------ LED_Flas.C -----------------------------------------------// Connect LED from +5V (etc) to this pin, via appropriate resistor
// [see Chapter 7 for details]sbit LED_pin = P1^5;
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.10 Part of an implementation of O NE-TASKSCHEDULER
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
One-task scheduler demonstration program- See Chapter 36 for details.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/#include "Main.H"
#include "Port.H"SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 914www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 940 ---
#define INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow 5
// Global variable
static tByte LED_state_G;
// Function prototypes
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_2_Init(void);void LED_Flash_Init(void);void Go_To_Sleep(void);
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void main(void)
{Timer_2_Init();    // Set up Timer 2
LED_Flash_Init();  // Prepare to flash LEDEA = 1;            // Globally enable interruptswhile(1)           // Super Loop
{Go_To_Sleep();  // Enter idle mode to save power}
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */void Timer_2_Init(void)
{// Timer 2 is configured as a 16-bit timer,// which is automatically reloaded when it overflows//// This code (generic 8051/52) assumes a 12 MHz system osc.  // The Timer 2 resolution is then 1.000 µs// (see Chapter 11 for details)//// Reload value is FC18 (hex) = 64536 (decimal)// Timer (16-bit) overflows when it reaches 65536 (decimal)// Thus, with these setting, timer will overflow every 1 msT2CON   = 0x04;   // Load Timer 2 control registerT2MOD   = 0x00;   // Load Timer 2 mode register
TH2     = 0xFC;   // Load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H  = 0xFC;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. high byteTL2     = 0x18;   // Load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L  = 0x18;   // Load Timer 2 reload capt. reg. low byteONE-TASK SCHEDULER 915www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 941 ---
// Timer 2 interrupt is enabled, and ISR will be called 
// whenever the timer overflows - see below.ET2     = 1;
// Start Timer 2 running
TR2   = 1;        }
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Init()- See below.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Init(void)
{LED_state_G = 0;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
LED_Flash_Update()Flashes an LED (or pulses a buzzer, etc) on a specified port pin.Code assumes this function will called every 1 ms.
The LED will flash at 0.5Hz (on for 1 second, off for 1 second)
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void LED_Flash_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow
{// This ISR is called every 1 ms// - only want to update the LED every secondstatic data tWord Call_count;
TF2 = 0;  // Reset the T2 flag   if (++Call_count < 1000)
{return;}
Call_count = 0;// Change the LED from OFF to ON (or vice versa)
// (Do this every second)if (LED_state_G == 1)
{SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 916www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 942 ---
LED_state_G = 0;
LED_pin = 0;}
else
{LED_state_G = 1;LED_pin = 1;}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Go_To_Sleep()This one-task scheduler enters 'idle mode' between clock ticks
to save power.  The next clock tick will return the processorto the normal operating state.
Note: a slight performance improvement is possible if this
function is implemented as a macro, or if the code here is simply pasted into the 'dispatch' function.  
However, by making this a function call, it becomes easier 
- during development - to assess the performance of the scheduler, using the 'performance analyser' in the Keil hardware simulator. See Chapter 14 for examples of this. 
*** May wish to disable this if using a watchdog ****** ADAPT AS REQUIRED FOR YOUR HARDWARE ***
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Go_To_Sleep(void)
{PCON |= 0x01;     // Enter idle mode (generic 8051 version)
// Entering idle mode requires TWO consecutive instructions 
// on 80c515 / 80c505 - to avoid accidental triggering//PCON |= 0x01;   // Enter idle mode (#1)//PCON |= 0x20;   // Enter idle mode (#2)}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.11 Part of an implementation of O NE-TASKSCHEDULERONE-TASK SCHEDULER 917www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 943 ---
If you compare the scheduler load in this example (Figure 36.1) with the correspon-
ding figures for single-task, 12-MHz 8051s in Chapter 14 (e.g. Figure 14.4), you will seethat this one-task version is considerably more efficient.  Specifically, this one-taskscheduler would – even on a very basic 8051 – allow the use of 0.1 ms tick intervals.
Further reading
—SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 918
FIGURE  36.1 Using the Keil hardware simulator to evaluate the CPU load imposed by a one-task
scheduler with 1 ms ticks, running on a 12 MHz (12 oscillations per instruction) 8051 
[Note: The test reveals that the CPU is 97% idle and that the maximum possible task duration is therefore approximately 0.97 ms.]
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 944 ---
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application is to have a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
GThe application is to be powered by batteries.
Problem
How do you create a battery-powered application that can operate for up to12 months between battery changes?
Background
In this pattern, we will consider how we can use a scheduler to create a battery-powered embedded application that can operate for up to 12 months between batterychanges.  
We provide some key background details in this section.
Primary and secondary cells
When we talk about a battery, we mean an electrochemical device that convertschemical energy into electricity, by means of one or more galvanic cells.
1A galvanic
cell is a comparatively simple device consisting of two electrodes (an anode and acathode) and an electrolyte solution. The first form of such a cell was created by theItalian Alessandro Volta in 1800 (Figure 36.2). This cell consists of a copper rod cath-ode (the positive electrode), a zinc rod anode (the positive electrode) and anelectrolyte consisting of a weak solution of sulphuric acid.
Briefly, the cell operates as follows. The metal in the zinc anode oxidizes (that is, it
‘rusts’ or ‘dissolves’) into the electrolyte solution, while hydrogen molecules from theelectrolyte are deposited on the cathode. When the anode is fully oxidized (or thecathode is fully reduced) the chemical reaction will stop and the battery is consideredto be discharged.
In some cases, it is possible to ‘recharge’ the battery. Recharging usually involves
applying a voltage across the plates to reverse the battery’s chemical process. Somechemical reactions, however, are difficult or impossible to reverse. Cells with irre-versible reactions are commonly known as primary cells , while cells with reversibleONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 919
1. Strictly, a battery consists of at least two galvanic cells (a ‘battery of cells’). However, in popular
usage, the term is used to refer to devices containing one or more cells.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 945 ---
reactions are known as secondary cells . Although, with care, it is sometimes possible to
perform a partial recharge of devices designed to be used as primary cells, this isseldom very effective and is frequently dangerous.
Battery characteristics
Numerous different combinations of electrode and electrolyte are used in modernbattery designs. These combinations result in cells which have different capacities,often presented in ‘milli-Amp-hours’ (mAh). For example, a cell might have a capac-ity of 1,000 mAh. In an ideal world, this would mean that the cell could generate acurrent of 1,000 mA for 1 hour before becoming discharged to the point that it wasno longer capable of powering our application: alternatively, the same ideal batterycould generate 1 mA for 1,000 hours before reaching this state. In reality, a batterydoes not have a single capacity rating that may be applied at all current levels. Forexample, a 1.5V (size D) alkaline ‘battery’ might typically have a rated capacity of10,000 mAh at 10 mA (continuous) and reduced capacities of 8,000 mAh at 100 mAand 4,000 mAh at 1,000 mA. Of course, many embedded systems do not operate con-tinuously and have varying current requirements while they are being used. As aresult, predicting the likely lifetime of batteries used in equipment with widely vary-ing current requirements is particularly difficult and the only practical solution is toestimate the likely needs from published manufacturer data sheets and then to test aprototype of the system under real conditions.
A second key characteristic of batteries is the discharge curve (Figure 36.3). Ideally,
with microcontroller applications, we wish to have a flat discharge curve, so that thebattery maintains its output voltage throughout its working life. If, instead of this flatdischarge characteristic, we have a sloping characteristic, the cell voltage can veryquickly fall below the level at which we will be able to operate our microcontroller.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 920
FIGURE  36.2 The first form of ‘battery’: a galvanic cell, as created by Alessandro Volta in 1800 Electrolyte
(sulphuric acid)Load
+ –e
Cathode
(copper)Anode
(zinc)www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 946 ---
Alkaline cells
A particularly popular type of cell used in modern embedded applications is the ‘alkaline’
cell. This battery is popular because it has – compared with conventional Leclanche drycells (‘ordinary batteries) – a flatter discharge curve and a higher cell capacity.
Typical figures for the service hours you can expect for common 1.5V alkaline cells
(adapted from Duracell data sheets) are given in Table 36.1.
Two useful rules of thumb:
GYou can expect a shelf life of 2–4 years from alkaline batteries. 
GAA cells are particularly popular and are widely available throughout the world.
These are appropriate for many applications. The ubiquitous Duracell MN1500, forexample, has a rating of 1850 mAh. At low currents (an average of around 0.3 mA),you can expect to get at least a year of life from such cells. ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 921
FIGURE  36.3 Idealized ‘flat’ and ‘sloping’ discharge characteristics 
[Note: that, in reality, most batteries have characteristics that lie somewhere between these two extremes.]
00102030405060708090100
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
90
95
10085
Call discharge (% of max discharge)Voltage (% of maximum)Flat
discharge
curve
Sloping
discharge
curve
TABLE 36.1 Typical operating life for alkaline cells
Cell type Average current Operating life (hours)
Alkaline AAA 245 3
"4 0 3 0
"1 5 8 0
Alkaline AA 275 5
"5 0 5 0
" 15 200
Alkaline D 475 20
" 235 50
" 115 130www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 947 ---
Obtaining the required voltage
Each cell gives 1.5V (nominal): four cells will therefore give you 6V. Note that this
does not alter the current rating: 1 MN1500 AA cell has a rating of 1.5V , 1,850 mAh,while four have a rating of 6V , 1,850 mAh.
Solution
We will particularly focus on the use of AA-sized alkaline cells as the power source, asthis is a popular and effective option. To do this then – for the reasons outlined in‘Background’ – we need to reduce the average current consumption to 0.3 mA. 
As we noted in Chapter 3 (see Table 3.1, page 36), the typical current consumption
for a Standard 8051 microcontroller (operating normally) is around 15 mA. At thiscurrent level, our batteries will last for around 200 hours – around 8 days. Even if theapplication spends most of its time in idle mode, the current consumption will stillbe around 5 mA: with luck, our application may operate for almost a month.
However, these figures do not tell the full story. In particular, they hide the fact
that current consumption is heavily dependent on the oscillator frequency, and oper-ating voltage. For example, if you consider the datasheet for the Atmel 89S53(included on the CD), it will be apparent that the current consumption varies withvoltage and oscillator frequency. More specifically, by considering the datasheets forthe 89S53 or a wide range of other 8051 devices, it becomes apparent that, to obtainour average of 0.3mA current consumption, we must run at a voltage of around 3V,and at a very low oscillator frequency (around 1 MHz, preferably less). In addition, wemust keep the application in idle mode most of the time.
A cost-effective way of obtaining the required oscillator frequency is to use a
watch crystal. These are cheap, small and widely available: they have frequencies of32.768 kHz. Note that to use this frequency you must work with an 8051 that canoperate in this frequency range: check your data sheet.
Working with AAA cells
The AA cells considered in detail in this pattern have a weight of 23.6 g or 0.83 oz.(Duracell MN1500 data sheet). To reduce the weight (and size) of your application,you way wish to consider using AAA cells, which have a weight of 11.0 g. or 0.39 oz.(Duracell MN2400 data sheet). These cells have a capacity of 1,150 mAh (DuracellMN2400 data sheet).
1,150 mAh translates into an average current of around 0.13 mA over a year. It is
now possible to obtain this level of current consumption from an 8051 device usingthe Small 8051s and particularly the modern Philips devices. For example, the Philips87LPC764 has very low current consumption in both active and idle states, particu-larly at low frequencies, as the data sheet (included on the CD ROM) makes clear.
From the data sheet, it is apparent that even in active mode (again assuming use of
a 32 kHz watch crystal), the 87LPC768 draws only around 0.1 mA, while in idle modethis figure falls to around 0.05 mA. Provided we do not need to drive high-powerexternal components, then these devices are ideal as the basis of lightweight embed-ded applications.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 922www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 948 ---
Working with 9V batteries
Another popular lightweight battery is the 9V ‘radio’ battery, with useful push-on
connector terminals. These have a capacity of around 500 mAh (Duracell MN1604data sheet), which translates into 0.06 mA average current over a year. The recentSmall 8051s (described earlier) can, almost match these requirements. However, inmost 8051-based applications, you will be unlikely to obtain more than around sixmonths of life from such a battery.
Working with D cells
If you require a longer operating life and / or higher current than AA cells can pro-vide, D cells may be an alternative. These comparatively large cells have a capacity ofaround 15,000 mAh (Duracell MN1300 data sheet). Over one year, this translates intoan average current of 1.7 mA: over two years, this becomes 0.8 mA. 
You can reliably obtain two years of life from D cells in embedded applications and
may even manage 3 years if your current requirements are very limited. For applicationswhere the user is not expect to carry the product around this can be a good solution. 
D cells are particularly attractive in applications such as long-term, unattended
data logging. Although the D cells are large and heavy, the alternative may be a lead-acid secondary cell and a solar-powered battery charger, which will be even heavier,more complex and considerably more expensive.
Working with lithium cells
Lithium cells have been introduced comparatively recently and have many character-istics that make them very attractive for use as primary cells in many battery-poweredembedded systems.
Key characteristics of this type of cell or battery:
Lithium cells have very low self-discharge rates: this means they can last for
many years (a decade is not uncommon) ‘on the shelf’. 
When being used, lithium batteries can last around three times longer than
alkaline batteries of the same size. This makes them ideal as, for example,CMOS backup batteries in desktop computers.
Lithium cells weigh around 30% less than equivalent alkaline cells.Unlike most other battery technology, lithium cells operate effectively over a
wide temperature range. Alkaline cells operate at around 50–60% of theirnormal level at 0°C, whereas lithium cells operate normally at this tempera-ture. Lithium cells continue to provide an output around 80% of their normallevel even at temperatures below –20°C, whereas alkaline cells are unusable atsuch temperatures.
Lithium primary cells are available in standard (AA) sizes, 1.5V.Lithium reacts violently when exposed to water and there were initial safety con-
cerns about batteries based on this metal. Recent designs have greatly reducedsuch problems, but you need to be aware of this potential safety concern.ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 923www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 949 ---
Lithium cells are not suitable for high-current applications (for example, driving
motors, or other such loads).
Lithium batteries cost around twice as much as alkaline batteries of the same size,
so may not always prove cost effective.
Lithium batteries are, currently, not as widely available as alkaline equivalents.
Overall, given these characteristics, it seems inevitable that, as prices fall, lithium
cells will become increasingly common in embedded applications.
Working with secondary cells
Rechargeable batteries are useful in many embedded applications, such as mobilephones, but cannot retain their charge for long enough to match the needs of thepresent pattern. 
Hardware resource implications
This pattern is only suitable for use in applications which require limited CPU activityand are able to spend most of their operational life in idle mode.
Reliability and safety implications
Typical one-year applications will be awakened from idle mode every 200 ms (say) tocheck a switch or perform some other processing. While in idle mode, they will notbe able to respond to external events. 
This type of architecture is common, for example, in TV remote-control applica-
tions and is appropriate for this purpose. This architecture may not be appropriate forsafety-related applications where very rapid responses are required.
Portability
This is a form of CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER [page 255] and is as portable as the
original pattern.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Reduces battery consumption to a low level.
Limited processing ability as a result of low clock frequencies.May not be appropriate for safety-related applications.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
This pattern can often be combined with 255- TICK SCHEDULER [page 894] or
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER [page 911] to reduce the resource requirements further.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 924www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 950 ---
Example: Automatic light
We are required to develop a new battery-powered cupboard (closet) light. It is
required to operate as follows:
GPress the switch once: a small bulb is lit.
GPress the switch again: the bulb goes out.
Of course, these requirements may be met very easily without resorting to the use
of a microcontroller. However, many people placing this type of device in a cupboardforget to turn out the light after use: as a result, the batteries are drained in the courseof a couple of hours. In this type of application the cost of the batteries will representa substantial percentage of the purchase price and the frequent need to replace thebatteries is a cause for concern.
We wish to create an application that operates as follows:
GPress the switch while the light is off: the light turns on.
GPress the switch while the light is on: the light turns off.
GIf the bulb is lit and the switch is not pressed again, the light will go out after30 seconds.
GThe battery life should be ‘as long as possible’.
Figure 36.4 shows a possible hardware design.ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 925
FIGURE  36.4 A hardware schematic for an automatic-light example. 20 1 VCCRST
19 2 P1.7P3.0
18 3 P1.6P3.1
17 4 P1.5XLT2
16 5 P1.4XTL1
15 6 P1.3P3.2
14 7 P1.2P3.3
13 8 P1.1P3.4
12 9 P1.0P3.5
11 10 P3.7GNDE
B
CZTX7515.5V, 0.3A lampVcc
10 µF
10 K
4 MHz
Atmel 1051www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 951 ---
The code for the completed system is given in Listing 36.12.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Automatic light example
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
#include "Main.h"
// ------ Port pins ------------------------------------------------
// Omit Port.H in this simple (one-file) example// Don’t use pins 1^0, 1^1 - NO INTERNAL PULL-UP RESISTORSsbit Switch_pin_G = P1^2;sbit Light_pin_G  = P1^3;
// ------ Private function prototypes ------------------------------
// Function prototypes
// NOTE: ISR is not explictly called and does not require a prototypevoid Timer_1_Init(void);void Timer_1_Manual_Reload(void);void Light_Init(void);
// ------ Private constants ----------------------------------------#define SWITCH_PRESSED 0
#define LIGHT_ON  0
#define LIGHT_OFF 1
// ------ Private variable definitions------------------------------
static tByte Switch_count_G = 0;
static tByte Auto_switch_off_count_G = 0;static tByte Switch_blocked_G = 0;
static bit LED_state_G = 0;
static tByte Call_count_G = 0;
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void main(void)
{Timer_1_Init(); // Set up Timer 2Light_Init(); // Prepare to flash the LED
EA = 1; // Globally enable interruptsSPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 926www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 952 ---
while(1)
{PCON |= 0x01;  // Go to sleep (idle mode)}
}
/* --------------------------------------------------------------- */
void Timer_1_Init(void)
{// Timer 1 is configured as a 16-bit timer,// which is manually reloaded when it overflowsTMOD &= 0x0F; // Clear all T1 bits (T0 left unchanged)TMOD |= 0x10; // Set required T1 bits (T0 left unchanged) 
// Sets up timer reload values
Timer_1_Manual_Reload();
//  Interrupt Timer 1 enabled
ET1  = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Timer_1_Manual_Reload()
This 'One-Year Scheduler' uses a (manually reloaded) 16-bit timer.
The manual reload means that all timings are approximate. THIS SCHEDULER IS NOT SUITABLE FOR APPLICATIONS WHEREACCURATE TIMING IS REQUIRED!!!Timer reload is carried out in this function. 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Timer_1_Manual_Reload(void)
{// Stop Timer 1TR1 = 0;
// This code (generic 8051/52) assumes a 4 MHz system osc.  
// The Timer 1 resolution is then 0.000003 seconds// (see Chapter 11 for details)//// We want to generate an interrupt every 200 ms (approx):// this takes 0.2 / 0.000003 timer increments// i.e. 66666 timer increments //// Reload value of 0x00 gives 65536 increments, which is // sufficiently close for our purposes here (around 2% out)TL1  = 0x00;TH1  = 0x00;ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 927www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 953 ---
//  Start Timer 1
TR1  = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Light_Init()
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Light_Init(void)
{Switch_count_G = 0;Auto_switch_off_count_G = 0;Switch_blocked_G = 0;// Write 1 to switch pin (to set it up for reading)Switch_pin_G = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Check_Switch()
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void Check_Switch(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_1_Overflow
{// This function is an implementation of the pattern On-Off Switch 
// If the light is on, 'Auto_switch_off_count' will be > 0 
// Decrement here - and switch the light off when it reaches zero. if (Auto_switch_off_count_G > 0)
{Auto_switch_off_count_G--;
if (Auto_switch_off_count_G == 0)
{Light_pin_G = LIGHT_OFF;}
}
// The switch is 'blocked' after each switch press,
// to give the user time to remove their finger: // If this is not done, the light will switch off again// when the user presses the switch for more than 0.4 seconds.//// If the switch is blocked, decrement the block count and return// without checking the switch pin status.if (Switch_blocked_G > 0)
{Switch_blocked_G--;SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 928www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 954 ---
return;
}
// Now read switch pin
if (Switch_pin_G == SWITCH_PRESSED)
{// If the switch pin is pressed, increment the switch count.  if (++Switch_count_G == 2)
{// If Switch_count_G == 2, this means that the pin has been// active // for two consecutive calls to this task, i.e. it is a// genuine switch press rather than a bounce.// The variable Auto_switch_off_count_G acts both as // an indication the light is on (if it is non-zero) // and a counter of the number of task calls the // light will remain on for.if (Auto_switch_off_count_G > 0)
{// The light is currently ON // -> switch it off.Light_pin_G = LIGHT_OFF;Auto_switch_off_count_G = 0;}
else
{// The light is currently OFF// -> switch it on and set the counter to 150 // (task is called every 0.2s so this gives 30 secondsdelay).Light_pin_G = LIGHT_ON;Auto_switch_off_count_G = 150;}
// Reset the switch count, and block the switch for the next 
// second (5 calls to this task).Switch_count_G   = 0;Switch_blocked_G = 5; }
}
else
{Switch_count_G = 0;}  ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 929www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 955 ---
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 36.12 Code for controlling an automatic light
Further reading
—SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 930www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 956 ---
Increasing the stability of the
scheduling
Introduction
All crystal oscillators and ceramic resonators have frequency outputs which vary
with temperature. As a result, schedulers driven by such clock sources also varytheir timing behaviour with temperature. 
STABLE SCHEDULER is a temperature-
compensated scheduler that adjusts its behaviour to take into account changes inambient temperature. chapter 37www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 957 ---
STABLE SCHEDULER
Context
GYou are developing an embedded application using one or more members of the
8051 family of microcontrollers.
GThe application has a time-triggered architecture, constructed using a scheduler.
Problem
How do you ensure that your scheduled application continues to operate with correcttiming even if the ambient temperature varies?
Background
See CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR [page 54] for a discussion of the impact of temperature on
the performance of crystal oscillator circuits.
Solution
In most practical applications where accurate timing is required, the system willderive its oscillator from some form of crystal oscillator. Unfortunately, the stability ofthese oscillators varies with temperature. To obtain stable scheduling, we have twomain options:
GMaintain the system at a constant, known temperature and adapt all timer settingsto match this. This might be achieved by placing the application in some formof industrial oven or in an ice bath. For most applications, this type of approachis impractical.
GMeasure the ambient temperature and adjust the system timing to take intoaccount any temperature changes.
S
TABLE SCHEDULER adopts this second approach.
Hardware resource implications
The main hardware implication is that we require some form of temperature sensor.
In most situations, a digital sensor (such as one of the Dallas Semiconductor 1620family) is a cost-effective choice, since it is itself cheap and requires at most threemicrocontroller pins.SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 932www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 958 ---
A particularly good alternative is an on-chip temperature sensor: some of the
Cygnal2and Analog Devices3ranges of 8051 microcontrollers include such a sensor,
making them ideal for this application.
The load imposed by the scheduling software is very small, with one temperature
measurement made at infrequent (typically 1-minute) intervals.
Reliability and safety implications
Use of a stable scheduler can improve the reliability of your application if accuratetiming over long periods is required.
Portability
Most microcontrollers can be linked to some form of external temperature sensorand, therefore, can apply this pattern.
Overall strengths and weaknesses
Improves the scheduler stability.
Usually increases costs.
Related patterns and alternative solutions
—
Example: Using a external Dallas DS1621 I2C temperature
sensor
In this example, we present a simple stable scheduler, using an external (DS1621)
temperature sensor (Listings 37.1 and 37.2).
The demonstration program displays time on an LED display; refer to Chapter 21
for suitable display hardware and the CD for a complete set of code listings.
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
Main.c (v1.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------
Demonstration program for:Stable SchedulerDrives 4 multiplexed multi-segment LED displays
- displays elapsed time.STABLE SCHEDULER 933
2.www.cygnal.com
3.www.analog.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 959 ---
Required linker options (see Chapter 13 for details):
OVERLAY 
(main ~ (CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,LED_MX4_Display_Update,SCH_Calculate_Ave_Temp_DS1621), SCH_dispatch_tasks !(CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,LED_MX4_Display_Update,SCH_Calculate_Ave_Temp_DS1621))
#include "Main.h"#include "2_01_12s.h" 
#include "LED_Mx4.h"#include "Cloc_Mx4.h"#include "I2C_1621.h"
/* ............................................................... */
/* ............................................................... */
void main(void)
{// Set up the schedulerSCH_Init_T2();
// Prepare for temperature measurements
I2C_Init_Temperature_DS1621();
// Add the 'Time Update' task (once per second)
// - timings are in ticks (1 ms tick interval)// (Max interval / delay is 65535 ticks)SCH_Add_Task(CLOCK_LED_Time_Update,100,10);
// Add the 'Display Update' task (once per second)
// Need to update a 4-segment display every 3 ms (approx)// Need to update a 2-segment display every 6 ms (approx)SCH_Add_Task(LED_MX4_Display_Update,0,3);
// This is scheduled once per minute
SCH_Add_Task(SCH_Calculate_Ave_Temp_DS1621,33,60000);
// Start the scheduler
SCH_Start();
while(1)
{SCH_Dispatch_Tasks();}
}SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 934www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 960 ---
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 37.1 Part of the implementation of a simple stable scheduler, using an 
external (DS1621) temperature sensor
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
2_01_12s.C (v1.00) 
------------------------------------------------------------------
*** THIS IS A STABLE SCHEDULER FOR STANDARD 8051 / 8052 ****** Uses T2 for timing, 16-bit auto reload ***
*** 12 MHz oscillator -> 1 ms (precise) tick interval ***
*** Assumes DS1621 temperature sensor available ***
#include "2_01_12s.h"
#include "I2C_1621.h"
// ------ Public variable definitions ------------------------------// The current temperature, recorded every hour
tByte Temperature_G;
// ------ Public variable declarations -----------------------------// The array of tasks (see Sch51.C)
extern sTask SCH_tasks_G[SCH_MAX_TASKS];
// The error code variable
//// See Port.H for port on which error codes are displayed// and for details of error codesextern tByte Error_code_G;
// Running total / average temperature (calculated every 24 hours)
static int Temperature_average_G = 0;
// Called every minute: only take reading once an hour
// (calling every hour requires changes to scheduler,// increasing the required memory for EVERY task).static tByte Minute_G;static tByte Hour_G;
// The temperature compensation data
// STABLE SCHEDULER 935www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 961 ---
// The Timer 2 reload values (low and high bytes) are varied depending 
// on the current average temperature.// // NOTE (1):// Only temperature values from 10 - 30 celsius are considered // in this version//// NOTE (2):// Adjust these values to match your hardware!tByte code T2_reload_L[21] = 
// 10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19{0xBA,0xB9,0xB8,0xB7,0xB6,0xB5,0xB4,0xB3,0xB2,0xB1,// 20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29   30
0xB0,0xAF,0xAE,0xAD,0xAC,0xAB,0xAA,0xA9,0xA8,0xA7,0xA6};
tByte code T2_reload_H[21] = 
// 10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19{0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,// 20  21  22  23  24  25  26   27  28  29  30
0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C,0x3C};
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Init_T2()Scheduler initialization function.  Prepares scheduler
data structures and sets up timer interrupts at required rate.Must call this function before using the scheduler.  
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Init_T2(void) 
{tByte i;
for (i = 0; i < SCH_MAX_TASKS; i++) 
{SCH_Delete_Task(i);}
// Reset the global error variable
// - SCH_Delete_Task() will generate an error code, //   (because the task array is empty)Error_code_G = 0;  
// Now set up Timer 2
// 16-bit timer function with automatic reloadSPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 936www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 962 ---
// Crystal is assumed to be 12 MHz
// The Timer 2 resolution is 0.000001 seconds (1 µs)// The required Timer 2 overflow is 0.001 seconds (1 ms)// - this takes 1000 timer ticks// Reload value is 65536 - 1000 = 64536 (dec) = 0xFC18
T2CON = 0x04;   // load Timer 2 control register
T2MOD = 0x00;   // load Timer 2 mode register
TH2 = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 high byte
RCAP2H = 0xFC;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, high byteTL2 = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 low byteRCAP2L = 0x18;  // load Timer 2 reload capture reg, low byte
ET2   = 1;  // Timer 2 interrupt is enabledTR2   = 1;  // Start Timer 2
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Start()Starts the scheduler, by enabling interrupts.NOTE: Usually called after all regular tasks are added,
to keep the tasks synchronized.
NOTE: ONLY THE SCHEDULER INTERRUPT SHOULD BE ENABLED!!! 
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Start(void) 
{EA = 1;}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Update()This is the scheduler ISR.  It is called at a rate 
determined by the timer settings in the 'init' function.
This version is triggered by Timer 2 interrupts:
timer is automatically reloaded.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Update(void) interrupt INTERRUPT_Timer_2_Overflow  
{tByte Index;STABLE SCHEDULER 937www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 963 ---
TF2 = 0; // Have to manually clear this. 
// NOTE: calculations are in *TICKS* (not milliseconds)
for (Index = 0; Index < SCH_MAX_TASKS; Index++)
{// Check if there is a task at this locationif (SCH_tasks_G[Index].pTask)
{if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay == 0)
{// The task is due to runSCH_tasks_G[Index].RunMe += 1;  // Inc. the 'RunMe' flag
if (SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period)
{// Schedule periodic tasks to run againSCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay = SCH_tasks_G[Index].Period;}
}
else
{// Not yet ready to run: just decrement the delay SCH_tasks_G[Index].Delay -= 1;}
}         
}
}   
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Calculate_Ave_Temp_DS1621()This function should be scheduled once per minute.Based on 1 measurement per hour,
this function updates a variable (Temperature_average_G) with the average temperature over the last 24 hours.
The updates are carried out every 24 hours.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Calculate_Ave_Temp_DS1621(void)
{if (++Minute_G == 60)
{Minute_G = 0;SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 938www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 964 ---
// An hour has elapsed - take temperature reading
I2C_Read_Temperature_DS1621();
// Add current reading to running total
Temperature_average_G += Temperature_G;
if (++Hour_G == 24)
{// 24 hours have elapsed - get average temperatureHour_G = 0;Temperature_average_G /= 24;
// Update the scheduler
SCH_Perform_Temperature_Adjustment();  }
}
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
SCH_Perform_Temperature_Adjustment()This scheduler adjusts its timing to take into account
changes in ambient temperature.
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
void SCH_Perform_Temperature_Adjustment(void)
{static int Previous_temperature_average_G;
if ((Previous_temperature_average_G - Temperature_average_G) != 0)
{// Only consider temperatures in range 10 - 30 Celsius in this // version (easily adjusted)if (Temperature_average_G < 10)
{Temperature_average_G = 10;}
else
{if (Temperature_average_G > 30)
{Temperature_average_G = 30;}
}STABLE SCHEDULER 939www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 965 ---
ET2 = 0;  // Disable interrupt
TR2 = 0;  // Stop T2
// Reload the timer 
TL2     = T2_reload_L[Temperature_average_G-10];   RCAP2L  = T2_reload_L[Temperature_average_G-10];   TH2     = T2_reload_H[Temperature_average_G-10];   RCAP2H  = T2_reload_H[Temperature_average_G-10];   
ET2   = 1;      
TR2   = 1;     }
Previous_temperature_average_G = Temperature_average_G;Temperature_average_G = 0;
}
/*------------------------------------------------------------------*-
---- END OF FILE -------------------------------------------------
-*------------------------------------------------------------------*/
Listing 37.2 Part of the implementation of a simple stable scheduler, using an 
external (DS1621) temperature sensor
Further reading
—SPECIALIZED ARCHITECTURES 940www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 966 ---
Conclusions
We draw the book to a close with two final chapters.
GIn Chapter 38, we review what we have tried to achieve through presentation of this
pattern collection.
GIn Chapter 39, we present a collected list of books and papers either directly
referenced in the text or of related interest.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 967 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 968 ---
What this book has tried to do
38.1 Introduction
In this chapter we review what we have tried to achieve through presentation of this
pattern collection.
38.2 What this book has tried to do
Many current embedded applications are developed in one of two ways:
GUsing no specific system architecture and, often, multiple interrupt-service routines.
GUsing a commercial, pre-emptive operating system.
In many ways, this echoes what happens in most parts of the research community
and in the rest of the world, in that:
GMost published code for embedded systems (on the WWW, for example), as well asmanufacturer application notes for microcontrollers and associated components,tends to be informally written, with great emphasis placed on the use of interrupts.
GMuch academic research in this area tends to focus on technical and theoreticalanalyses of complex, pre-emptive, applications (see Chapter 13 for further details).Where case studies are presented, these often seem to bear little relation to thetypes of problems faced in real projects.
Throughout this book, we have sought to steer a middle path between these two
areas. Specifically, we have sought to demonstrate – for a range of real-world embeddedapplications – that the use of a co-operative scheduler with a single interrupt source(per microcontroller) is a practical proposition, even for distributed applications basedon multiple, 8-bit microcontrollers with very limited CPU and memory resources. chapter 38www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 969 ---
We have also tried to demonstrate, informally, that applications based on this
co-operative architecture have very predictable behaviour and, hence, are an appro-priate basis for safety-related applications. We have argued that predictable andreliable behaviour is not just an essential requirement in safety-related applications,but is also appropriate in all embedded systems where designers and developers areconcerned with the quality of the products they are producing.
The simple nature of these schedulers also provides other benefits. For example, it
means that developers themselves can, very rapidly, port the scheduler onto a newmicrocontroller environment. It also means that the basic architecture may be readilyadapted to meet the needs of a particular application, without altering the basic(co-operative) approach (as we sought to demonstrate in Part H). 
However, perhaps the most important side-effect of these simple schedulers is that
– unlike a traditional ‘real-time operating system’ – they become part of the applica-tion itself (Figure 38.1), rather than forming a separate code layer between the usercode and the application (Figure 38.2). 
In our experience, this tight integration of scheduler and application means that
developers quickly understand and claim ownership of the scheduler code. This isimportant, since it avoids a ‘not invented here’ or ‘blame it on the OS’ philosophy,CONCLUSIONS 944
FIGURE 38.1 A co-operative scheduler (of the type discussed in this book) becomes part of the
applicationCo-operative schedulerApplication software
System hardware
FIGURE  38.2 A ‘real-time operating system’ remains a separate applicationReal-time operating system
System hardwareApplication softwarewww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 970 ---
which can arise when developers must interface their code to a large and complex
real-time operating system, the features and behaviour of which they may never fullyunderstand.
38.3 Conclusions
In this chapter we have briefly reviewed what we have tried to achieve through pres-entation of this pattern collection.
This brings us to the end of the book. To explore further the topics discussed
in this chapter and in earlier chapters, refer to the sources of information listed inChapter 39.WHAT THIS BOOK HAS TRIED TO DO 945www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 971 ---
Collected references 
and bibliography
In this chapter we present a collected list of books and papers which are either directly
referenced in the text, or of related interest.
39.1 Complete list of publications
Acarnley, P.P. (1984) Stepping Motors: A Guide to Modern Theory and Practice , Peter
Peregrinus Ltd, UK.
Ackermann, J. (1998) ‘Active steering for better safety, handling and comfort’, Proceedings
of Advances in Vehicle Control and Safety , Amiens, France, 1–3 July.  
Alexander, C. (1979) The Timeless Way of Building , Oxford University Press, New York.
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M. with Jacobson, M., Fisksdahl-King, I. and
Angel, S. (1977) A Pattern Language , Oxford University Press, New York.
Allworth, S.T. (1981) An Introduction to Real-Time Software Design , Macmillan, London.  
Atherton, D.P. (1999) ‘PID controller tuning’, IEE Computing & Control Engineering
Journal , 10 (2): 44–50. 
Awad, M., Kuusela, J. and Ziegler, J. (1996) Object-oriented Technology for Real-time
Systems , Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Axelson, J. (1998) Serial Port Complete , Lakeview Research.
Axelson, J. (1999) USB Complete , Lakeview Research.
Ayala, K. (2000) The 80251 Microcontroller , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Barnett, R.H. (1995) The 8051 Family of Microcontrollers , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Barrenscheen, J. (1996) ‘On-board communication via CAN without Transceiver’,
Infineon (Siemens) Application Note AP2921. [Available from www.infineon.com ] chapter 39www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 972 ---
Bates, I. (2000) ‘Introduction to scheduling and timing analysis’, in The Use of Ada in
Real-Time System , IEE Conference Publication 00/034.
Bennett, S. (1994) Real-Time Computer Control , 2nd edn, Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 
Bignell, V. and Fortune, J. (1984) Understanding System Failures , Manchester University
Press, Manchester.
Bishop, C.M (1995) Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition , Oxford University Press
Oxford.
Boehm, B.W. (1981) Software Engineering Economics , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Booch, G. (1994) Object-Oriented Analysis and Design , Benjamin Cummings.
Bowerman, B.L. and O'Connell, R.T. (1987) Time Series Forecasting: Unified Concepts
and Computer Implementation , Duxbury Press, Boston, MA.
Brooks, F.P. (1975) The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering , Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA.
Brooks, F.P. (1986) ‘No silver bullet – essence and accidents of software engineering’,
in H.J. Kugler (ed.) Information Processing 86 , Elsevier Science, Amsterdam. 
Broughton, J. (1994) ‘Assessing the safety of new vehicle control systems’, Proceedings
of the First World Congress on Applications of Transport Telematics and IntelligentVehicle-Highway Systems , Paris, November 1994. 
BS IEC 61508 (1999) ‘Functional safety of electrical / electronic / programmable
electronic safety-related systems’. [Available from BSI, London]
Burns, A. and Wellings, A. (1997) Real-time Systems and Programming Languages ,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Buschmann, F., Meunier, R., Rohnert, H., Sommerlad, P., and Stal, M. (1996) Pattern-
Oriented Software Architecture: A System of Patterns , Wiley, Chichester.
Cahill, S.J. (1994) C for the Microprocessor Engineer , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Coleman, D., Arnold, P., Bodoff, S., Dollin, C., Gilchrist, H., Hayes, F. and Jeremes, P.
(1994) Object-oriented Development: The Fusion Method , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Cooling, J.E. (1991) Software Design for Real-time Systems , Chapman & Hall, London.
Cunningham, W. and Beck, K. (1987) ‘Using pattern languages for object-oriented
programs’, Proceedings of OOPSLA’87 , Orlando, FL.
Daley, S. and Liu, G.P. (1999) ‘Optimal PID tuning using direct search algorithms’, IEE
Computing & Control Engineering Journal , 10 (2): 51–56. 
DeMarco, T. (1978) Structured Analysis and System Specification , Prentice-Hall, New
Jersey.
Dorf, R.C. and Bishop, R.H. (1998) Modern Control Systems , 8th edn, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Douglass, B.P. (1998) Real-time UML , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Doyle, F.J., Gatzke, E.P. and Parker, R.S. (1999) Process Control Modules: A Software
Laboratory for Control Design: The MATLAB-based Process Control Guide for ChemicalEngineering Professionals , Prentice Hall, New Jersey. COLLECTED REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 947www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 973 ---
Dutton, K., Thompson, S. and Barraclough, B. (1997) The Art of Control Engineering ,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Ebinger, B., Sienel, W. and Sporl, T. (1998) ‘A hardware-in-the-loop test environment
for interconnected ECUs for passenger cars and commercial vehicles’, Proceedings of
Advances in Vehicle Control and Safety , Amiens, France, 1–3 July. 
Elgar, P. (1998) Sensors for Measurement and Control , Longman, London.
Falla, M. (1997) Advances in Safety-Critical Systems , University of Lancaster Press,
Lancaster.
Fenton, N. and Pfleeger, S.L. (1996) Software Metrics , Thomson, London.
Fowler, M. and Scott, K. (2000) UML Distilled , 2nd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Franco, S. (1998) Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated Circuits , 2nd
edn, McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA.
Franklin, G.F., Powell, J.D. and Emami-Naeini, A. (1994) Feedback Control of Dynamic
Systems , 3rd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Franklin, G.F., Powell, J.D. and Workman, M. (1998) Digital Control of Dynamic
Systems , 3rd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R. and Vlissides, J. (1995) Design Patterns: Elements of
Reusable Object-oriented Software , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Gannsle, J. (1992) The Art of Programming Embedded Systems , Academic Press, San Diego. 
Gergeleit, M. and Streich, H. (1994) ‘Implementing a distributed high-resolution real-
time clock using the CAN-bus’, Proceedings 1st International CAN Conference , Mainz,
Germany, September 1994. 
Goldie, J. (1991) ‘Comparing EIA-485 and EIA-422-A line drivers and receivers in mul-
tipoint applications’, National Semiconductor Application Note 759. [Availablefrom www.national.com ]
Goldie, J. (1996) ‘Ten ways to bulletproof RS-485 interfaces’, National Semiconductor
Application Note 1057. [Available from www.national.com ]
Goldsmith, S. (1993) A Practical Guide to Real-Time Systems Development , Prentice Hall,
New Jersey.
Graham, I. (1994) Object-Oriented Methods , 2nd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Haney, P.R., Richardson, M.J., Clarke, N.J. and Barber, P.A. (1998) ‘Development of
adaptive cruise control systems for motor vehicles’, Proceedings of Control ’98 ,
Swansea (Mini Symposium on Mechatronics). 
Hank, P. and Jöhnk, E. (1997) ‘SJA1000 stand-alone CAN controller’, Philips
Application Note AN97076. [Available from www.philips.com ]
Hatley, D.J. and Pirbhai, I.A. (1987) Strategies for Real-time System Specification , Dorset
House.
Hatton, L. (1994) Safer C: Developing Software for High-integrity and Safety-critical
Systems ’, McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead.
Haykin, S. (1994) Neural networks: A Comprehensive Foundation , Macmillan College
Publishing Company, New York.CONCLUSIONS 948www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 974 ---
Horowitz, P. and Hill, W. (1989) The Art of Electronics, 2nd edn, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Huang, H-W (2000) Using the MCS-51 Microcontroller , Oxford University Press, New York.
Intel (1985) Microcontroller Handbook 1986 , Intel Corporation.
Jacobson, I., Christerson, M., Jonsson, P. and Övergaard, G. (1993) Object-Oriented
Software Engineering , revised edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Kenjo, T. (1984) Stepping Motors and their Microprocessor Circuits , Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
Kopetz, H. (1997) Real-time Systems: Design Principles for Distributed Embedded
Applications , Kluwer Academic, New York.
Labrosse, J.J. (1998) uC/OS II: The Real-Time Kernel , R&D Books. 
Lander, C.W. (1993) Power Electronics, 3rd edn, McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead.
Lawrence, P.D. and Mauch, K. (1988) Real-Time Microcomputer System Design: An
Introduction , McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead.
Lawrenz, W. (1997) CAN System Engineering , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Leen, G., Heffernan, D. and Dunne, A. (1999) ‘Digital networks in the automotive
vehicle’, Computing and Control , 10 (6): 257–66.
Leveson, N.G. (1995) Safeware: System Safety and Computers , Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.
Li, Y., Pont, M.J. and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘A comparison of the performance of radial
basis function and multi-layer Perceptron networks in a practical condition moni-toring application’, Proceedings of Condition Monitoring , Swansea, UK, April 12–15,
1999. 
Li, Y., Pont, M.J., Parikh, C.R. and Jones, N.B. (2000) ‘Using a combination of RBFN,
MLP and kNN classifiers for engine misfire detection’, in R. John andR. Birkenhead (eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft Computing Techniques and
Applications , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Lippmann, P. (1987) ‘An introduction to computing with neural networks’, Institute
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (USA), Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing ,
April, 1987.
Liu, J.W.S. and Ha, R. (1995) ‘Methods for validating real-time constraints’, Journal of
Systems and Software, 30 (1–2): 85–98.
Locke, C.D. (1992) ‘Software architecture for hard real-time applications: Cyclic exec-
utives vs. fixed priority executives’, Journal of Real-Time Systems , 4: 37–53.
Lynn, P. and Fuerst, W. (1998) Introductory Digital Signal Processing with Computer
Applications , Wiley, Chichester.
Mariutti, P. (1999) ‘Crystal oscillator of the C500 and C166 microcontroller families’,
Infineon (Siemens) Application Note AP242005. [Available from www.infineon.com ]
MISRA (1994) ‘Development guidelines for vehicle-based software’, Motor Industry
Software Reliability Report , November, 1994. [These guidelines, plus nine supporting
reports, are available from MIRA]COLLECTED REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 949www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 975 ---
MISRA (1998) Guidelines for the use of the C language in vehicle-based software’,
Motor Industry Software Reliability Report . [Available from MIRA]
Nelson, T. (1995) ‘The practical limits of RS-485’, National Semiconductor Application
Note 979. [Available from www.national.com ]
NHTSA (1996) ‘Effectiveness of occupant safety systems and their use’. National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (US) Third Report to Congress , December 1996.
NHTSA (1999) ‘NHTSA light vehicle antilock brake system research program task 4’,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (US) Report , January 1999.
Nise, N.S. (1995) Control Systems Engineering , 2nd edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Nissanke, N. (1997) Realtime Systems , Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 
Ong, H.L.R, Pont, M.J. and Peasgood, W. (2001) ‘Do software-based techniques
increase the reliability of embedded applications in the presence of EMI?’,Microprocessors and Microsystems, 24 (10), 481–91.
Oppenheim, A.V., Schafer, R.W. and Buck, J.R. (1999) Discrete-time Signal Processing ,
Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Palacheria, A. (1997) ‘Using PWM to generate analog output’, Microchip Application
Note AN538.
Parikh, C.R., Pont, M.J., Li, Y. and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘Improving the performance of
multi-layer Perceptrons where limited training data are available for some classes’,Proceedings of the IEE International Conference on Neural Networks , Edinburgh,
September 1999.
Parikh C.R., M.J. Pont and N.B. Jones (2001) ‘Application of Dempster-Shafer
theory in condition monitoring applications – a case study’, Pattern Recognition
Letters, 22 (6–7), 777–85.
Passino, K.M. and Yurkovich, S. (1998) Fuzzy Control , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Perier, L. and Coen, A. (1998) ‘CAN-do solutions for car multiplexing’, Proceedings of
the 5th International CAN Conference , San Jose, California, November 1998.
Plauger, P.J. (1992) The Standard C Library , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Pont, M.J. (1996) Software Engineering with C++ and CASE Tools, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA. 
Pont, M.J. (1998) ‘Control system design using real-time design patterns’, Proceedings
of Control ’98 , Swansea, UK, September.
Pont, M.J. (in press) ‘Designing and implementing reliable embedded systems
using patterns’, in P. Dyson (ed.) Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on
Pattern Languages of Programming and Computing, 1999 , to be published by Springer-
Verlag.
Pont, M.J., Ong, H.L.R., Parikh, C.R., Kureemun, R., Wong, C.P., Peasgood, W. and Li,
Y. (1999a) ‘A selection of patterns for reliable embedded systems’, original paperpresented at EuroPlop ’99, Kloster Irsee, Germany.
Pont, M.J., Li, Y., Parikh, C.R. and Wong, C.P. (1999b) ‘The design of embedded
systems using software patterns’, Proceedings of Condition Monitoring 1999 , Swansea,
UK, 12–15 April.CONCLUSIONS 950www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 976 ---
Press, W.H., Teulolsky, S.A., Vettering, W.T. and Flannery, B.P. (1992) Numerical Recipes
in C: The Art of Scientific Computing , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Pressman, R. (1992) Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach , 3rd edn. McGraw-
Hill, Maidenhead. 
Ralston, A. and Meek, C.L. (1976) Encyclopaedia of Computer Science , Petrocelli/Charter.
Rashid, M.H. (1993) Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications , 2nd edn,
Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Rumbaugh, J., Blaha, M., Premerlani, W., Eddy, F. and Lorensen, W. (1991) Object-
Oriented Modeling and Design , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Schildt, H. (1997) Teach Yourself C , 3rd edn, McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead. 
Scott, G. (1995) ‘Interfacing an MCS 51 Microcontroller to an 82527 CAN Controller’,
Intel Application Note AP-724. [Available from www.intel.com ]
Selic, B., Gullekson, G. and Ward, P.T. (1994) Real-time Object-oriented Modeling , Wiley,
New York. 
Sharp, R.S. (1998) ‘Variable geometry active suspension for cars’, IEE Computing and
Control Engineering Journal, 9 (5): 217–22.
Shaw, A.C. (2001) Real-Time Systems and Software , Wiley, New York.
Sivasothy, S. (1998) ‘Transceivers and repeaters meeting the EIA RS-485 interface
standard’, National Semiconductor Application Note 409. [Available fromwww.national.com ]
Smith, S.W. (1999) The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing , 2nd
edn, California Technical Publishing. [Available from www.DSPguide.com ]
Somerville, I. (1996) Software Engineering , 5th edn, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Storey, N. (1996) Safety-critical Computer Systems , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Tindell, K. (1998) ‘Embedded systems in the automotive industry’, Proceedings of the
1998 Embedded Systems Conference , San José, CA.
Waites, N. and Knott, G. (1996) Computing , 2nd edn, Business Education Publishers,
Sunderland.
Ward, N.J. (1991) ‘The static analysis of a safety-critical avionics control system’, in
D.E. Corbyn and N.P. Bray (eds) Air Transport Safety: Proceedings of the Safety and
Reliability Society Spring Conference, 1991, SaRS.
Ward, P.T. and Mellor, S.J. (1985) Structured Development for Real-Time Systems , Prentice
Hall, New Jersey.
Warnes, L. (1998) Electronic and Electrical Engineering: Principles and Practice ,
Macmillan, London. 
Wong, C. P. and Pont, M. J. (2000) ‘An overview of an evolutionary algorithm pattern
language’, in R. John and R. Birkenhead (eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft
Computing Techniques and Applications , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Yalamanchili, S. (2001) Introductory VHDL: From Simulation to Synthesis , Prentice Hall,
New Jersey.COLLECTED REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 951www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 977 ---
Yourdon, E.N. (1989) Modern Structured Analysis, Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1942) ‘Optimal setting for automatic controllers’,
Trans. ASME , 64(11), 759–68.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1943) ‘Process lags in automatic control circuits’,
Trans. ASME , 65(5), 433–44.
39.2 Other pattern collections
Alexander, C. (1979) The Timeless Way of Building , Oxford University Press, New York.
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M. with Jacobson, M. Fisksdahl-King, I., and
Angel, S. (1977) A Pattern Language , Oxford University Press, New York.
Buschmann, F., Meunier, R., Rohnert, H., Sommerlad, P., and Stal, M. (1996) Pattern-
oriented Software Architecture: A System of Patterns , Wiley, Chichester.
Cunningham, W. and Beck, K. (1987) ‘Using pattern languages for object-oriented
programs’, Proceedings of OOPSLA’87 , Orlando, FL.
Douglass, B.P. (1998) Real-time UML , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R. and Vlissides, J. (1995) Design Patterns: Elements of
Reusable Object-oriented Software , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Wong, C. P. and Pont, M. J. (2000) ‘An overview of an evolutionary algorithm pattern
language’, in R. John, and R. Birkenhead (eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft
Computing Techniques and Applications , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1942) ‘Optimal setting for automatic controllers’,
Trans. ASME , 64 (11), 759–68.
Ziegler, J.G. and Nichols, N.B. (1943) ‘Process lags in automatic control circuits’,
Trans. ASME , 65 (5), 433–44.
39.3 Design techniques for real-time / embedded systems
Allworth, S.T. (1981) An Introduction to Real-Time Software Design , Macmillan, London. 
Awad, M., Kuusela, J. and Ziegler, J. (1996) Object-oriented Technology for Real-time
Systems , Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Cooling, J.E. (1991) Software Design for Real-time Systems , Chapman & Hall, London.
Douglass, B.P. (1998) Real-time UML , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Goldsmith, S. (1993) A Practical Guide to Real-Time Systems Development , Prentice Hall,
New Jersey.
Hatley, D.J. and Pirbhai, I.A. (1987) Strategies for Real-time System Specification , Dorset
House.CONCLUSIONS 952www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 978 ---
Kopetz, H. (1997) Real-time Systems: Design Principles for Distributed Embedded
Applications , Kluwer Academic, New York.
Lawrence, P.D. and Mauch, K. (1988) Real-Time Micrcomputer System Design: An
Introduction , McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead.
Nissanke, N. (1997) Realtime Systems, Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 
Selic, B., Gullekson, G. and Ward, P.T. (1994) Real-time Object-oriented Modeling , Wiley,
New York. 
Shaw, A.C. (2001) Real-Time Systems and Software , Wiley, New York.
Ward, P.T. and Mellor, S.J. (1985) Structured Development for Real-Time Systems , Prentice
Hall, New Jersey.
Ward, N.J. (1991) ‘The static analysis of a safety-critical avionics control system’, in
D.E. Corbyn and N.P. Bray (eds) Air Transport Safety: Proceedings of the Safety and
Reliability Society Spring Conference, 1991, SaRS.
39.4 Design techniques for high-reliability systems
Bignell, V. and Fortune, J. (1984) Understanding System Failures , Manchester University
Press, Manchester.
Broughton, J. (1994) ‘Assessing the safety of new vehicle control systems’, Proceedings
of the First World Congress on Applications of Transport Telematics and IntelligentVehicle-Highway Systems , Paris, November. 
BS IEC 61508 (1999) ‘Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable
electronic safety-related systems’. [Available from BSI, London]
Falla, M. (1997) Advances in Safety-Critical Systems , University of Lancaster Press,
Lancaster.
Hatton, L. (1994) Safer C: Developing Software for High-integrity and Safety-critical
Systems , McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead.
Leveson, N.G. (1995) Safeware: System Safety and Computers , Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
MISRA (1994) ‘Development guidelines for vehicle-based software’, Motor Industry
Software Reliability Report , November, 1994. [These guidelines, plus nine supporting
reports, are available from MIRA.]
MISRA (1998) ‘Guidelines for the use of the C language in vehicle-based software’,
Motor Industry Software Reliability Report . [Available from MIRA.]
Ong, H.L.R, Pont, M.J. and Peasgood, W. (2001) ‘Do software-based techniques
increase the reliability of embedded applications in the presence of EMI?’,Microprocessors and Microsystems, 24 (10), 481–91.
Storey, N. (1996) Safety-critical Computer Systems, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.COLLECTED REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 953www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 979 ---
39.5 The 8051 microcontroller
Barnett, R.H. (1995) The 8051 Family of Microcontrollers, Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Huang, H-W (2000) Using the MCS-51 Microcontroller , Oxford University Press,
New York.
39.6 Related publications by the author
Li, Y., Pont, M.J., and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘A comparison of the performance of radial
basis function and multi-layer Perceptron networks in a practical condition moni-toring application’, Proceedings of Condition Monitoring 1999 , Swansea, UK, April
12–15. 
Li, Y., Pont, M.J., Parikh, C.R. and Jones, N.B. (2000) ‘Using a combination of RBFN,
MLP and kNN classifiers for engine misfire detection’, in R. John, and R.Birkenhead (eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft Computing Techniques and
Applications , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Ong, H.L.R, Pont, M.J. and Peasgood, W. (2001) ‘Do software-based techniques
increase the reliability of embedded applications in the presence of EMI?’,Microprocessors and Microsystems , 24 (10), 481–91.
Parikh, C.R., Pont, M.J., Li, Y. and Jones, N.B. (1999) ‘Improving the performance of
multi-layer Perceptrons where limited training data are available for some classes’,Proceedings of the IEE International Conference on Neural Networks , Edinburgh,
September.
Parikh C.R., M.J. Pont and N.B. Jones (2001) ‘Application of Dempster-Shafer
theory in condition monitoring systems’, Pattern Recognition Letters , 22 (6–7)
777–85 .
Pont, M.J. (1996) Software Engineering with C++ and CASE Tools , Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA. 
Pont, M.J. (1998) ‘Control system design using real-time design patterns’, Proceedings
of Control ’98 , Swansea, UK, September 1998.
Pont, M.J., Ong, H.L.R., Parikh, C.R., Kureemun, R., Wong, C.P., Peasgood, W. and Li,
Y. (1999a) ‘A selection of patterns for reliable embedded systems’, original paperpresented at EuroPlop ’99, Kloster Irsee, Germany.
Pont, M.J., Li, Y., Parikh, C.R. and Wong, C.P. (1999b) ‘The design of embedded sys-
tems using software patterns’, Proceedings of Condition Monitoring 1999 , Swansea,
UK, 12–15 April.
Pont, M.J. (in press) ‘Designing and implementing reliable embedded systems
using patterns’, in Dyson, P. (Ed.) Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on
Pattern Languages of Programming and Computing, 1999 , to be published by Springer-
Verlag.
Wong, C. P. and Pont, M. J. (2000) ‘An overview of an evolutionary algorithm pattern
language’, in: R. John, and R. Birkenhead, (eds) Advances in Soft Computing: Soft
Computing Techniques and Applications , Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. CONCLUSIONS 954www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 980 ---
Appendices
There are three appendices:
GAppendix A provides details of the design notation used throughout this book.
GAppendix B provides information about the contents of the CD.
GAppendix C provides information about the WWW site associated with the book.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 981 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 982 ---
The design notation and CASE tool
Overview
This appendix will provide a brief description of the design notation used throughout
the book and the CASE tool used to produce the associated figures.
The CASE tool
The diagrams throughout this book were created using the Select ‘Yourdon’ CASEtool. This product is now distributed by Aonix Corporation.
1
Note that a copy of this CASE tool is included with the book Software Engineering
with C++ and CASE Tools (Pont, 1996). This is a full copy of the product, but has an
educational licence and may not be used for commercial purposes.
The notation
The notation used in this book is fully described elsewhere (Pont, 1996). Briefly, the
design is described in a series of layers, starting from an initial high-level design (inthe form of a context diagram) and ending with some form of process specification(which will, typically, be implemented as a C function). 
The design process also covers aspects such as the creation of the user interface and
testing of the components; these issues are not considered here.
The following series of figures (Figures A1.1–A1.6), taken from Pont (1996) illus-
trate some of the key documents for the design of a bank auto-teller machine (FigureA1.1), culminating in a code framework (in desktop C++ in this case: Listing A1.1).appendixa
1.www.aonix.comwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 983 ---
APPENDICES 958
FIGURE  A1.1 The ATM interface 5 6 42 3 1
8 9 7
Enter 0Which service do you require?
Cheque book
Statement
QUITCash
Balance
Card slotPaper slot
Cash slotLSE
SADIEwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 984 ---
APPENDIX A 959
FIGURE  A1.2 The context diagramBank service
till
software
Bank
Computer
LinkPassword
correctBCL
faultTransaction
detailsAccount
informationProcessed
passwordCard
Reader
Card OKCard
insertedKeep card
Eject card CR fault Card data
SoftkeysKeypad
Shutdown
switchPrinterCash
Dispenser
Video
MonitorCD fault
Cash dataCash level
P fault
Paper level
Printed slip data
VM fault
MessagesManual shutdown
requestInput dataSk faultInput dataK faultwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 985 ---
APPENDICES 960
FIGURE  A1.3 The  Level 1 DfDMain
control
process
Eject cardKeep card Card OKCheck
supplies
1 7Available
services
Available
services
Message
no paper
Message
no cashTCash level
Paper levelCard insertedProcess
password
2
Valid
passwordT
Customer
requestProcess
password
4
TRead cardKeep cardEject cardMESSAGE: Thank you
MESSAGE: Card retainedMESSAGE: Invalid
card insertedCash card
data
Card data
Card OKAccount numberProcessed
passwordPassword correct
Entered
passwordsMESSAGE: Invalid password
MESSAGE: Ask user to
type in password
Hardware
status
monitor
5MESSAGE: Please use
another machineManual shutdown
request
Harware faultsProcess
password
4Cash card
data
Available
servicesAvailable
servicesAccount numberMESSAGE: Ask user which
service is required
Cash data
MESSAGE: Customer
service messages
Printed slip
data
Transaction
details
MESSAGE: available
choicesCash
requested
Account
information
Customer
requestCustomer
request
Twww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 986 ---
APPENDIX A 961
FIGURE  A1.4 DfD 1-3Control
of service
delivery
1Get
required
service
2
Process
required
service
3T
TCustomer
request
Processing
complete
Printed slip data
MESSAGE: Customer
service messages
Transaction details
Cash dataCash requestAccount
information
Account
numberCustomer
requestCustomer
request IAvailable
servicesMESSAGE: Ask user which
service is required
MESSAGE: Available
choicesCustomer
requestwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 987 ---
APPENDICES 962
FIGURE  A1.5 DfD 1-3-3Cash
available
Available
servicesDoneOrder for
cheque bookOrder
cheque book
from bank
5
Print
customer
balance
2Dispense
cash to
customer
3Cheque book
availableAvailable
services
Account
numberMESSAGE: Your
cheque book will
be posted to you
BalanceAccount enquiry
Account
numberBalance
available
Available
servicesAccount
balance
T DoneTDone T
Print customer
mini-statement
4Mini statementAccount enquiry
Account numberAccount information
Mini statement
available
Available
servicesDone TControl
customer
request
processing
1Customer
requestsProcessing
complete
Cash
receiptCash dataCash withdrawalAccount enquiry
MESSAGE:
Dispense cash
Cash request
Customer
requestAccount numerAccount
informationwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 988 ---
/***********************************************************
*                                                          ** A Bank Service Till (ATM) Simulation (Process-Oriented) **                                                          **                                                          ************************************************************/
#include <assert.h>
#include <iostream.h>#include <stdlib.h>#include <time.h>
// Maximum number of tries allowed to enter correct password
const int MAX_NUM_PASS_TRIES   = 3;
// Various "flags"
const int TRUE = 1;const int FALSE = 0;
const int OUT_OF_PAPER = 10;
const int OUT_OF_CASH = 11;
const int CHECK_CARD = 12;APPENDIX A 963
FIGURE  A1.6 PSpec 1-3-2@IN  = Available services
@IN  = Customer request I@OUT = Customer request@OUT = MESSAGE: Ask user which service is required@OUT = MESSAGE: Available choices
@PSpec Get required service// Generates simple menu (containing only the available options) 
// and returns a valid choice
Pre-condition:
None
(MESSAGE: Ask user which service is required) = ‘Which service do you require?’ 
(MESSAGE: Available choices) = list of (Available services)(Customer request) = (Customer request I)
Post-condition:
(Customer request) is a valid choice
@www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 989 ---
const int KEEP_CARD = 13;
const int EJECT_CARD = 14;const int ORDER_CHEQUE_BOOK = 15;const int PRINT_BALANCE = 16;const int PRINT_MINI_STATEMENT = 17;const int DISPENSE_CASH = 18;const int QUIT = 19;
// Function prototypes 
void Check_cash_reserves(int&);void Check_paper_reserves(int&);void Check_supplies(int&, int&, int&, int&);void Deliver_services(int&, int& ,int&, int&);void Dispense_cash_to_customer(int&);void Get_password(int&,int&,int&);void Get_required_service(int&, int, int, int, int);int  Hardware_fault_detected();void Order_cheque_book_from_bank(int&);void Print_customer_balance(int&);void Print_customer_mini_statement(int&);void Process_cash_card(int, int* = 0);  void Process_required_service(int, int&, int&, int&, int&);void Shutdown(void);
/***********************************************************
*                                                          **   FUNCTION: main() **                                                          ************************************************************/int main(void)
{int cheque_OK,
balance_OK,statement_OK,cash_OK;
int valid_password_entered, valid_card_entered;
int user_wants_to_quit, tries;
// Set up non-repeatable random numbers for simulation 
srand((unsigned)time(NULL));
// Simulate (up to) five customers in queue then
// manual shut down APPENDICES 964www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 990 ---
for (int customer = 1; customer <= 5; customer++)
{// Welcome banner cout << "----------------------------------\n";cout << "PROTOTYPE BANK AUTO TELLER MACHINE\n";cout << "----------------------------------\n\n";
Check_supplies(cash_OK, balance_OK,
statement_OK, cheque_OK);
Process_cash_card(CHECK_CARD, &valid_card_entered);if (valid_card_entered)
{tries = 0; user_wants_to_quit = FALSE;Get_password(valid_password_entered,
user_wants_to_quit, tries); 
if ((valid_password_entered)
&& (!user_wants_to_quit))
{// Keep delivering services till user says quit// (or hardware fault) Deliver_services(cheque_OK, balance_OK,
statement_OK, cash_OK);
Process_cash_card(EJECT_CARD);} 
else
{// No valid password if (user_wants_to_quit)
{// Polite ejection Process_cash_card(EJECT_CARD);}  
}   
}
} 
// Simulate manual shutdown
Shutdown();return 0;}APPENDIX A 965www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 991 ---
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Shutdown() ** *
*   OVERVIEW: Exit message, and exit program. ** *
*   PRE:      None. **   POST:     None. **                **   RETURNS:  void.                                    **                ************************************************************/void Shutdown(void)
{// Pre - none
cout << "Please use another machine.\n";
cerr << "*** SIMULATING MACHINE SHUTDOWN ***\n";exit(1);   
// Post - none(!)
} 
/***********************************************************
*                      **   FUNCTION: Check_supplies()                             **                                            **   OVERVIEW: Check cash and paper reserves &c. **                                            **   PRE:      No hardware faults.         **   POST:     Got valid data.             **                                        **   RETURNS:  void.                       **                                           ************************************************************/void Check_supplies(int&  cash_OK_REF,
int&  balance_OK_REF,int&  statement_OK_REF,int&  cheque_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
int paper_level_OK; // Is paper level okay? (flag)APPENDICES 966www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 992 ---
cout << "Next customer please wait...\n\n";
Check_cash_reserves(cash_OK_REF);  
Check_paper_reserves(paper_level_OK);  
if (!paper_level_OK)
{balance_OK_REF = FALSE;statement_OK_REF = FALSE;}
else   
{// Reset these for new customer balance_OK_REF = TRUE;statement_OK_REF = TRUE;}
// Reset flag for new customer (always available)
cheque_OK_REF = TRUE;
// Post - got valid data
assert((cash_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (cash_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((balance_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (balance_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((statement_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (statement_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((cheque_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (cheque_OK_REF == TRUE));
}
/***********************************************************
*                               **   FUNCTION: Hardware_fault_detected() ** *
*   OVERVIEW: Make sure hardware is not damaged. ** *
*   PRE:      None. **   POST:     None. ** *
*   RETURNS:  TRUE (1) if fault, FALSE (0) otherwise. ** *
***********************************************************/APPENDIX A 967www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 993 ---
int Hardware_fault_detected()
{// Pre - none
// Simulating a hardware fault with a prob. of 1/100  
if ((rand() % 100) == 0)
{cerr << "*** SIMULATING HARDWARE FAULT ***\n";return 1;}
else
{return 0;}
// Post - none
}
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Check_cash_reserves() ** *
*   OVERVIEW: Check cash level. ** *
*   PRE:      No hardware faults. **   POST:     Got valid data. ** *
*   RETURNS:  void.                                        ** *
***********************************************************/void Check_cash_reserves(int& cash_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
// Simulating a 1/6 chance of a cash shortage
if ((rand() % 6)==0)
{cash_OK_REF = FALSE;cerr << "*** SIMULATING LOW CASH LEVEL ***\n";}      
else
{cash_OK_REF = TRUE;}APPENDICES 968www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 994 ---
// Post - got valid data
assert((cash_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (cash_OK_REF == TRUE));
}
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Check_paper_reserves() ** *
*   OVERVIEW: Check that there is paper to print on. ** *
*   PRE:      No hardware faults. **   POST:     Got valid data. ** *
*   RETURNS:  void. ** *
***********************************************************/void Check_paper_reserves(int& paper_level_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
// Simulating a 1/6 chance of a paper shortage
if ((rand() % 6)==0)
{paper_level_OK_REF = FALSE;cerr << "*** SIMULATING LOW PAPER LEVEL ***\n";}      
else
{paper_level_OK_REF = TRUE;}
// Post - got valid data
assert((paper_level_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (paper_level_OK_REF == TRUE));
}
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Process_cash_card()         **                                      **   OVERVIEW: Validate, eject or retain cash card. *APPENDIX A 969www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 995 ---
* *
*   PRE:      No hardware faults. **             Valid operation requested.    * *   POST:     None.                        ** *
*   RETURNS:  void. **                                    ************************************************************/void Process_cash_card(int required_op, int* card_OK_PTR)
{ // Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }// Pre - valid operation requestedassert((required_op == CHECK_CARD) ||
(required_op == KEEP_CARD) ||(required_op == EJECT_CARD));
/* NOTE: Process_cash_card() is a function with a
default argument.  Can call as:        
Process_cash_card(CHECK_CARD, card_OK);
orProcess_cash_card(KEEP_CARD);Process_cash_card(EJECT_CARD);  */ 
switch (required_op)
{case CHECK_CARD:
// Using "extra" argument 
cout << "Please insert your card.\n";
// Validate user's card *card_OK_PTR = (((rand() % 6) != 0)
? (TRUE) : (FALSE));
if (*card_OK_PTR)
{cerr <<"*** SIMULATING CORRECT CARD INSERTED ***\n";cout << "Thank you.\n\n";}
else
{cerr <<"*** SIMULATING *INCORRECT* CARD INSERTED ***\n"; APPENDICES 970www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 996 ---
cout << "Incorrect card.\n";
Process_cash_card(EJECT_CARD);}
break;
case KEEP_CARD:
cout << "Password incorrect. Card retained.\n";cout << "Please contact your branch.\n";cerr << "*** SIMULATING SWALLOWING CARD ***\n\n";break;
case EJECT_CARD:
cout << "Thank you for using this machine.\n";cerr << "*** SIMULATING EJECTING CARD ***\n\n";
break;  
}
// Post - none
}
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Get_password() ** *
*   OVERVIEW: Get and validate user's password ** *
*   PRE:      No hardware faults.           **   POST:     Got valid data.              ** *
*   RETURNS:  void.                        **                                         ************************************************************/void Get_password(int& password_OK_REF,
int& want_to_quit_REF,int& tries_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
int password;tries_REF++;                                             
cout << "Please enter your password"APPENDIX A 971www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 997 ---
<< "\n(or 9999 to simulate QUIT button): ";
cin >> password;
if (!(password == 9999))
{// User did not ask to quit
// Simulate call to bank computer 
cerr << "*** SIMULATING CALL TO BANK COMPUTER ***\n";
// Simulating one single valid password... 
// In reality, send account number and password// to bank computer // Computer returns “YES” or “NO”.
if (password == 1234)
{password_OK_REF = TRUE;}
else
{password_OK_REF = FALSE;}
if (!(password_OK_REF)) 
{if (tries_REF < MAX_NUM_PASS_TRIES)
{cout << "Password incorrect.\n";// Recursive call to Get_password()          Get_password(password_OK_REF, want_to_quit_REF, tries_REF);}
else
{// Too many tries - could be a stolen card?  Process_cash_card(KEEP_CARD);}
}
else
{      cout << "Thank you.\n\n";}
}
else
{APPENDICES 972www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 998 ---
// User wants to quit 
want_to_quit_REF = TRUE; }     
// Post - got valid data
assert((password_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (password_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((want_to_quit_REF == FALSE)
|| (want_to_quit_REF == TRUE));
assert(tries_REF <= MAX_NUM_PASS_TRIES);}
/***********************************************************
*                                          **   FUNCTION: Deliver_services()               **                                          **   OVERVIEW: Ask user for reqd. service and deliver it. **                                       **   PRE:      No hardware faults.        **             Got valid data.           **   POST:     None.                     **                                      **   RETURNS:  void.                     **                                      ************************************************************/void Deliver_services(int& cheque_OK_REF,
int& balance_OK_REF,int& statement_OK_REF,int& cash_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
// Pre - got valid data
assert((cash_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (cash_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((cheque_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (cheque_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((balance_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (balance_OK_REF == TRUE));
assert((statement_OK_REF == FALSE)
|| (statement_OK_REF == TRUE));
int user_choice;APPENDIX A 973www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 999 ---
Get_required_service(user_choice, cheque_OK_REF,
balance_OK_REF, statement_OK_REF, cash_OK_REF);
while (user_choice != QUIT)
{Process_required_service(user_choice, cheque_OK_REF,
balance_OK_REF, statement_OK_REF, cash_OK_REF);
Get_required_service(user_choice, cheque_OK_REF,
balance_OK_REF, statement_OK_REF, cash_OK_REF);
} 
// Post - none
}
/***********************************************************
* *
*   FUNCTION: Get_required_service()    **                                     **   OVERVIEW: Find out what service user requires. **                                     **   PRE:      No hardware faults.       **   POST:     Got valid choice.         **                                     **   RETURNS:  void.                    **                                     ************************************************************/void Get_required_service(int& service_REF,
int  cheque_OK,int  balance_OK,int  statement_OK,int  cash_OK)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
int service;cout << "Which service do you require: \n";
cout << "Quit -  Type 1\n";
if (cheque_OK) cout << "Order cheque book -  Type 2\n";if (balance_OK) cout << "Print balance -  Type 3\n";if (statement_OK) cout << "Print statement -  Type 4\n";if (cash_OK) cout << "Cash -  Type 5\n";APPENDICES 974www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1000 ---
do {
cout << "Please enter the appropriate number : "; cin >> service;} while ((service > 5) 
|| (service < 1)|| ((service == 2) && (!cheque_OK))|| ((service == 3) && (!balance_OK))|| ((service == 4) && (!statement_OK))|| ((service == 5) && (!cash_OK)));
cout << "Thank you.\n\n";switch (service)
{case 1: service_REF = QUIT; break;case 2: service_REF = ORDER_CHEQUE_BOOK; break; case 3: service_REF = PRINT_BALANCE; break;case 4: service_REF = PRINT_MINI_STATEMENT; break;case 5: service_REF = DISPENSE_CASH; break;}
// Post - got valid choice
assert((service_REF == QUIT) ||
(service_REF == ORDER_CHEQUE_BOOK) ||(service_REF == PRINT_BALANCE) ||(service_REF == PRINT_MINI_STATEMENT) ||(service_REF == DISPENSE_CASH));
}
/***********************************************************
*                                            **   FUNCTION: Process_required_service()  **                                     **   OVERVIEW: Perform user's requested service. **                                     **   PRE:      No hardware faults.       **             Got valid choice of service. **   POST:     None.                   **                                    **   RETURNS:  void.                   **                                    ************************************************************/APPENDIX A 975www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1001 ---
void Process_required_service(int  user_choice,
int& cheque_OK_REF, int& balance_OK_REF, int& statement_OK_REF, int& cash_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }
// Pre - got valid choice
assert((user_choice == QUIT) ||
(user_choice == ORDER_CHEQUE_BOOK) ||(user_choice == PRINT_BALANCE) ||(user_choice == PRINT_MINI_STATEMENT) ||(user_choice == DISPENSE_CASH));
switch (user_choice)
{case ORDER_CHEQUE_BOOK:
Order_cheque_book_from_bank(cheque_OK_REF); 
break;
case PRINT_BALANCE:
Print_customer_balance(balance_OK_REF);
break;
case PRINT_MINI_STATEMENT: 
Print_customer_mini_statement(statement_OK_REF);
break;
case DISPENSE_CASH: 
Dispense_cash_to_customer(cash_OK_REF);
break;}
// Post - none
}
/***********************************************************
*                                    **   FUNCTION: Order_cheque_book_from_bank() **                                    **   OVERVIEW: Order cheque book.        **                                    *APPENDICES 976www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1002 ---
*   PRE:      No hardware faults.      *
*             Got valid data.          **   POST:     Returning valid data.     **                                     **   RETURNS:  void.                     **                                     ************************************************************/void Order_cheque_book_from_bank(int& cheque_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }// Pre - got valid dataassert((cheque_OK_REF == TRUE));
cerr << "*** SIMULATING ORDER FOR CHEQUE BOOK ***\n";
cout << "Your cheque book will be posted to you.\n\n";
cheque_OK_REF = FALSE;// Post - returning valid data
assert((cheque_OK_REF == FALSE));
}
/***********************************************************
*                                    **   FUNCTION: Print_customer_balance()  **                                    **   OVERVIEW: Print customer's balance. **                                    **   PRE:      No hardware faults.      **             Got valid data.         **   POST:     Returning valid data.    **                                    **   RETURNS:  void.                   **                                    ************************************************************/void Print_customer_balance(int& balance_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }// Pre - got valid dataassert((balance_OK_REF == TRUE));
cout << "Your balance is: 99.99 (*** SIMULATED ***)\n\n";APPENDIX A 977www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1003 ---
balance_OK_REF = FALSE;
// Post - returning valid data
assert((balance_OK_REF == FALSE));}
/***********************************************************
*                                    **   FUNCTION: Print_customer_mini_statement() **                                    **   OVERVIEW: Print mini statement.     **                                    **   PRE:      No hardware faults.      **             Got valid data.         **   POST:     Returning valid data.    **                                    **   RETURNS:  void.                   **                                    ************************************************************/void Print_customer_mini_statement(int& statement_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }// Pre - got valid dataassert((statement_OK_REF == TRUE));
cerr << "*** SIMULATING PRINTING OF MINI STATEMENT ***";
cout << "\nPlease take your mini statement.\n\n";
statement_OK_REF = FALSE;// Post - returning valid data
assert((statement_OK_REF == FALSE));}
/***********************************************************
*                                      **   FUNCTION: Dispense_cash_to_customer()                  **                                      **   OVERVIEW: Deliver cash.              **                                      **   PRE:      No hardware faults.        **             Got valid data.           **   POST:     Returning valid data.     **                                     *APPENDICES 978www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1004 ---
*   RETURNS:  void.                    *
*                                     ************************************************************/void Dispense_cash_to_customer(int& cash_OK_REF)
{// Pre - no hardware faultsif (Hardware_fault_detected()) { Shutdown(); }// Pre - got valid dataassert((cash_OK_REF == TRUE));
cerr << "*** SIMULATING CASH DELIVERY ***\n";
cout << "Please take your cash.\n\n";
cash_OK_REF = FALSE;// Post - returning valid data
assert((cash_OK_REF == FALSE));}
/***********************************************************
*                 *** END OF PROGRAM ***        ************************************************************/
Listing A1.1 The prototype ATM system softwareAPPENDIX A 979www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1005 ---
Guide to the CD
Overview
This short appendix provides a guide to the contents of the CD.
The basis of the CD
The CD is based on information kindly provided by Keil Software; this includes
the evaluation version of all the Keil compilers, plus numerous data sheets on 8051microcontrollers.
The CD has a menu which will guide you through the installation process.
The source code for this book
The source code for this book is NOT automatically installed with the Keil compiler.
The source files are included on the CD in the directory \Pont. For example, if
your CD–ROM drive is mapped to D: you will find the source files in the directoryD:\Pont.
Use ‘ Windows Explorer’  (or equivalent) to copy these files from the CD to your
hard drive.appendixbwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1006 ---
APPENDIX B 981
Copyright Restrictions
The code included in this book took many years to produce. It is not ‘ free ware’
and is subject to some simple copyright restrictions. These are as follows:
GHaving purchased a copy of this book, you are entitled to use the code listed inthis book and included on the CD in your projects, should you choose to do so. Ifyou use the code in this way, then no run-time royalties are due. However, theauthor would appreciate it if you acknowledged the source of the code in theproduct documentation.
GIf there are ten developers in your team using code adapted from this book,please purchase ten copies of the book.
G You may not, under any circumstances , publish or otherwise distribute any of
the source code included in the book or on the CD, in any form or by anymeans, without explicit written authorization from the author. If you wish topublish limited code fragments then, in most circumstances, this permission willbe granted, subject only to an appropriate acknowledgement accompanying thepublished material. If you wish to publish more substantial code listings, paymentof a fee may be required. Please contact the author for further details.www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1007 ---
Guide to the WWW site
Overview
This brief appendix provides information about the WWW site associated with
this book.
The URL
There is a WWW site associated with this book, at the following URL:
http://www.engg.le.ac.uk/books/Pont
Contents of the WWW site
On this WWW site you will find:
GA set of detailed case studies describing the application of the techniques discussedin this book in a series of small and large projects
GBug reports and code updates 
GFurther code samples
GLinks to other relevant sites
Bug reports and code updates
There is huge amount of code involved in this project, both in the book itself and onthe associated CD. The author has personally tested all the code that appears here.Nonetheless, errors can creep in.appendixcwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1008 ---
If you think you have found a bug, please first check the WWW site to see if
anyone else has picked up the error: if they have, a code correction will have beenmade available.
If you have found a bug not listed on the WWW site, please send an e-mail to the
author explaining the bug (M.Pont@le.ac.uk) and he will do his best to help.
Anyone who spots a bug will be acknowledged (if they wish) in subsequent
editions of the book.APPENDIX C 983www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1009 ---
www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1010 ---
3-LEVEL PWM 822–30
4-bit interface LCD character
panel  471
7-segment LED  450–1
8XC520 (Dallas)  89, 98, 99, 276,
872
8XC552 (Philips)  91–2, 2989V radio batteries 92324C64 (Atmel)  49680C390 (Dallas)  46, 48, 8980c751 (Philips)  41, 9087C550 (Dallas)  80987LPC764 (Philips)  41, 61, 90,
922
89C52 (Atmel)  11889C420 (Dallas)  55, 8489C1051 (Atmel)  8989C2051 (Atmel)  62, 75, 8989C4051 (Atmel)  60, 8989S53 (Atmel)  31–2, 89, 223–7,
524–36, 763, 922
255-
TICK SCHEDULER 893,
894–910
1232 external timer  217, 219–228048 microcontroller  308051 microcontroller
STANDARD 8051 30–4
SMALL 8051 39, 41–5
EXTENDED 8051 39, 46–52
alternative solutions  39building your own  51–2clock speeds  34hardware components  35, 37,
38
idle operating mode  36–7linking together  50, 540–1,
543–52
memory architecture  34–5naming of family members  33oscillator cycles  33–4, 55performance levels  33–4pin count  35–6portability  38power consumption  36–7power-down operating mode
37
reliability and safety  37–8
8052 microcontroller  30–180251 microcontroller  39
A-A FILTER (anti-aliasing filter)
794–801
alternative solutions  800continuous-time filters  799over-sampling the signal  800portability  800reliability and safety  799switched-capacitor filters 798–9
AC loads  148–58
EMR DRIVER (electromagnetic
relay)  149–55
inductive kick  152inrush currents  152RC snubber  153–4
SSR DRIVER (solid-state relay)
156–8
switching on/off  152–3
ACKNOWLEDGE signal (I2C)
499–500
active low inputs  75–6AD421 (Analog Devices)  843AD8517 (Analog Devices)  780ADC see analogue-to-digital
converters
ADC PRE -AMP 777–81
level shifting circuits  778–9microphone pre-amplifier  780operational amplifiers  777portability  779reliability and safety  779voltage amplification  777–8,
780
Add Task function  265–6, 339address bus  95address bytes  611address counter  470–1address latch enable (ALE)  91, 95air-conditioning systems  873air-traffic control  861–2, 865Airbus  543, 549
alarm clock application  20–1alarm systems  841ALE (address latch enable)  91, 95Alexander, C.  22aliasing
A-A FILTER 794–801
and digital-to-analogue
converters (DACs)  844
and SEQUENTIAL AD C  786
alkaline batteries  921–2Allworth, S.T.  12, 251amplifiers
BJT-based amplifier circuit  858operational amplifiers  777,
797–8, 799, 858
power amplifiers  858–9
transconductance amplifier
843–4
voltage amplification  777–8,
780
see also ADC PRE –AMP
Analog Devices
AD421 843AD8517  780analogue-digital converter  760digital-analogue converter
842, 843
EXTENDED 8051 46–7, 48
memory options  81, 89temperature sensors  933watchdog chips  217
analogue voltage measurement
757–61
analogue-to-digital converters
(ADC)  731, 756–806
A-A FILTER 794–801
ADC PRE -AMP 777–81
CURRENT SENSOR 802–6
flash ADCs  787hardware options  759–61
ONE-SHOT ADC 757–76
SEQUENTIAL ADC 782–93
successive-approximation
ADCs  787Indexwww.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1011 ---
anti-windup protection  869–70
asynchronous data transmission
364, 368, 520
AT cut  54Atmel
24C64  49689C542  11889C1051  8989C2051  62, 75, 8989C4051  60, 8989S53  31–2, 89, 223–7,
524–36, 763, 922
memory options  89
SMALL 8051 41, 42
watchdog timers  223–7
atomic clocks  60audio equipment  858–9auditory-evoked responses  785auto-reload timers  197, 238–9automatic light  925–30autopilot applications  6–7Awad, M.  16, 17, 20Axelson, J.  370, 396Ayala, K.  39
back lighting LCD character
panels  472
bandwidth
and data transfer  712–15and 
PID CONTROLLER 871–2
and SEQUENTIAL ADC 784–5
bank-switched memory
arrangements  104–7
bargraph display  187–92Barnett, R.H.  251Barrenscheen, J.  684, 685Basic CAN  678basic input/output system (BIOS)
232
Bates, I.  12, 251batteries
alkaline  921–2D cell  923discharge curve  920–1galvanic cells  919, 920lithium cell  923–49V  923predicting lifetime of  920primary cells  919recharging  919–20, 924secondary cells  920, 924voltage of  922
baud rates
PC LINK (RS-232) 364, 366,
367–8, 386–96, 520SCC SCHEDULER 681
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)562
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )
612–13
and timer 2  743
BDATA memory  86Beck, K.  22Bennett, S.  251Bignell, V.  552BIOS (basic input/output system)
232
bipolar-junction transistor (BJT)
see BJT
Bishop, R.H.  866, 873bit rate
DAC OUTPUT 842
SEQUENTIAL ADC 786
bitwise operators  179–83BJT (bipolar-junction transistor),
amplifier circuit 858
BJT (bipolar-junction transistor),
and current-sense resistors803–4
BJT DRIVER 124–33, 142
buffering output  125–7inrush currents  128load faults  131portability  131reliability and safety  128–31switching off inductive DC
loads  129–31
blink control circuit  470Booch, G.  16bounce behaviour of switches
399–400, 402, 410–11
brightness control  823–30,
834–9
broadband signals  784–5Brooks, F.P.  25brownouts  73–4buffers
and 
BJT DRIVER 125–7
and connecting up LEDs  112and 
HARDWARE PWM 810
IC BUFFER 118–2
and KEYPAD INTERFACE 438,
439
logic families  120–2and multi-segment LED
displays  451, 454
UDN2585A 451–3, 454
bug reports  982–3Burns, A.  543, 546Burr-Brown
RCV420  761transconductance amplifier
843–4
XTR105  761XTR110  843–4
business information systems
(BISs)  3–5
busy flag (BF)  470buzzers  116–17, 133bytes
address bytes  611format in I2C protocol  499message bytes  611reading and writing  178–9
C167 (Infineon)  34
C501 (Infineon)  33, 34, 36,
89–90
C505C (Infineon)  46, 90C509 (Infineon)  90, 98, 872C515C (Infineon)  46, 90, 93,
386–96, 686–710, 760,776, 788–92, 809, 812–17
C517 (Infineon)  872C541 (Infineon)  373C8051F000 (Cygnal)  842–3cable connections (RS-232)
365–6
caesium beam clock  60CAN (controller area networks)
545–7, 675–710
capacitors  57, 65CASE tool  957central-heating systems  155,
158, 165–8
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 221–2,
224–7
CERAMIC RESONATOR 64–6
connecting  66cost  64frequency variation and
temperature  931
portability  65reliability and safety  65stability  64
Character Generator (CG) RAM
470
character set of LCD panels  469clock frequency/speed
latch and memory
combinations  97, 100–1
and oscillator frequency  55–6
SPI PERIPHERAL 522–3
STANDARD 8051 34
clock synchronization
and I2C protocol  497, 500INDEX 986www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1012 ---
and shared-clock schedulers
543–5
clock-outs  741closed-loop control systems
864–5
CMOS logic family  120–2
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
246–53, 255–96, 716
compared to pre-emptive
scheduler  250–2
core scheduler library  280–96CPU load  274–6data structure  260–1error reporting  272–4function pointers  255–8,
268–70, 277
functions
add task  265–6, 339delete task  270–1dispatch task  266–8initialization  262–3report status  272–4sleep  271start  270update  263–4, 268, 336–7
integration of scheduler and
application  944–5
interrupt generation  263Keil linker options  268–70key components  258and memory  274oscillator frequency  274–6portability  279power consumption  271reliability and safety  246,
276–9
resource consumption  260,
274–6
task array  261, 277task jitter  268task overlap  277, 278tick intervals  263, 278–9watchdog support  274
co-operative thinking  297CODE memory  86, 88
and interrupts  236
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY
100–8
speed of access  92
code size
I2C communication protocol
501
SPI PERIPHERAL 523
code updates  982–3Coen, A.  9Coleman, D.  16
common anode packages  450common cathode packages  450communication systems for
hydrofoils  853–5
condition-monitoring
applications  718, 723
consecutively scheduled tasks
720–4
context switch  247, 340continuous-time filters  799contrast adjustments  472control algorithms  865–72, 876control parameters  871controller area networks (CAN)
545–7, 675–710
Cooling, J.E.  251copyright restrictions  981cost of licences
I2C protocol  502
SPI PERIPHERAL 524
counters
address counter  470–1incrementing  424–32switch block counter  415see also timers
critical sections of code  247–50,
338
cruise-control system  17–20,
551, 874–8
Crydom MP240D3 SSR  158
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 54–63
connecting  57, 58
to dual-processor boards  62,
63
cost  57external modules  54, 58–9on-chip  60–1oscillator frequency  55–6, 57,
61–2
and 
PC LINK (RS-232)  368–9,
372
portability  60and 
RC RESET 73
reliability and safety  58–60and RS-232 communication
368–9
stability  56–7, 59–60start-up times  58temperature-compensated
(TCXOs)  59, 931, 932
Cunningham, W.  22current measurement  758–61
CURRENT SENSOR 802–6
portability  805reliability and safety  805
current sinks  134–6current-mode DACs  843–4current-mode sensor components
761
current-sense resistors  802–3cursor/blink control circuit  470cyclic scheduling  251Cygnal
C8051F000  842–3on-chip DACs  842–3temperature sensors  933
Cypress Semiconductor  373
D cell batteries  923
DAC DRIVER (digital-to-analogue
converter driver) 857–9
portability  857reliability and safety  857
DAC OUTPUT (digital-to-analogue
converter output) 841–52
aliasing  844alternative solutions  845bit rate  842external current-mode DAC
843–4
external voltage-mode DAC
843
frequency distortion  844on-chip DACs  842–3port pins and  844portability  844reliability and safety  844sample rate  842sinc compensation  854software architecture  844speech playback  845–52transconductance amplifier
843–4
DAC SMOOTHER (digital-to-
analogue convertersmoother)  853–6
portability  856reliability and safety  855
Dallas Semiconductor
8XC520  98, 99, 276, 87280C390  46, 4887C550  80989C420  55, 844CAN support  678DS1050  809DS1620  932, 933–40DS1621  515Econoreset  77, 78, 79
EXTENDED 8051 46, 48INDEX 987www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1013 ---
Dallas Semiconductor  continued
fast 8051 devices  786–7high speed devices  34memory options  81, 89, 98–9pulse-width modulation
devices  809
STANDARD 8051 34
temperature sensors  515, 932,
933–40
watchdog chips  217
Darlington arrangement  134,
858
data acquisition  541–3, 718data bus  95, 472Data bytes  611–12data lines  522DATA memory  86–7, 88
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 94–9
speed of access  92
data registers  470data structure
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
260–1
255- TICK SCHEDULER 894–5
see also message structure
data transfer
I2C protocol  498–500limited bandwidth  712–15shared-clock schedulers  545–6
SPI PERIPHERAL 522
UART data transfer  235, 608,
675
see also message structure
DATA UNION 712–15
portability  714reliability and safety  713–14
DC loads  109–47
BJT DRIVER 124–33, 142
IC BUFFER 118–23
IC DRIVER 134–8
inductive kick  129inrush currents  128
MOSFET DRIVER 139–43
NAKED LED 110–14
NAKED LOAD 115–17
SSR driver  144–7switching on/off  128–31
DC motor control  128, 143, 147,
822, 861–4, 879–88
DD (Display Data) RAM  467De Marco, T.  8, 16debouncing switches  399–400,
402, 410–11
delays
generic delay code  200–5HARDWARE DELAY 194–205
SOFTWARE DELAY 206–14
Delete Task function  270–1design notation  957desktop systems  5–6, 162, 231–2
see also 
PC LINK (RS-232)
device addresses  496–7digital-to-analogue converters
(DACs)  840–59
conversion noise  853
DAC DRIVER 857–9
DAC OUTPUT 841–52
DAC SMOOTHER 853–6
voltage mode DACs  843, 857
diodes  129–30, 153direct addressing  82–3disaster recovery  218discharge curve of batteries
920–1
Dispatch task function  266–8Display Data (DD) RAM  467distributed networks  608, 646
node wiring  684transceivers  683
Dolphin Integration  51DOMINO TASK  720–4
portability  722reliability and safety  722
Dorf, R.C.  866, 873Douglass, B.P.  16DRAM (dynamic RAM)  83DS1050 (Dallas)  809DS1620 (Dallas)  932, 933–40DS1621 (Dallas)  515Duracell  921Dutton, K.  866, 873duty cycles
HARDWARE PRM 742
HARDWARE PWM 808–9
dynamic RAM (DRAM)  83
EEPROM (electrically erasable
programmable read-onlymemory)  85, 496, 503,510–15, 530–6
electromagnetic interference
(EMI)  151, 811, 820
electromagnetic relays  144, 145electromechanical relays  149,
152, 155
electrostatic discharge (ESD)  403embedded systems  8–10, 162
EMR DRIVER 149–55
portability  153reliability and safety  150–3switching on/off inductive
loads  152–3
zero-crossing detection  151
enable inputs  648encoding data  363error checking/handling
I2C protocol  502–3network and node errors
547–50
RS-232 protocol  372
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)  561
error code displays 137–8, 183,
272–4
event-triggered systems  10–11examples
255-
TICK SCHEDULER
896–910
1232 external watchdog timer
219–22
A-A FILTER  800–1active low resets  75–6amplifiers  780automatic lights  925–30baud rate generator  386–96brightness of light bulbs  834–9buzzers  116–17, 133CAN-based scheduler  686–710central-heating pump control
with an EM relay  155with an SSR  158with 
SUPER LOOP 165–8
CERAMIC RESONATOR
connections  66
condition monitoring and
control  723
counter  424–32cruise-control system  874–8
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR
attaching to an Atmel
89C2051  62
attaching to a dual-processor
board  62
data acquisition and FFT  718DC motor control
MOSFET DRIVER 143
PID CONTROLLER 879–88
SSR DRIVER 147
delays
in an I2C library  208generic code  200–5
detecting a blown bulb  805–6Econoresets  79error code displays  137–8
in a scheduler  183
external I2C ADC  767–72INDEX 988www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1014 ---
external parallel ADC  772–6
external SPI ADC  763–7
HARDWARE PRM on the 8052
744–7
HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT
library  731–5
HYBRID SCHEDULER 341–57
I2C PERIPHERAL
with ADC converters  519,
767–72
core library  503–10delays in an I2C library  208EEPROM interface  510–15temperature sensors  515–19,
933–40
internal ADC  776, 788–92
KEYPAD INTERFACE 439–48
large buzzers  133LCDs
controlling an LCD  183and 
KEYPAD INTERFACE
484–90
time displays on an LCD
473–84
updating displays  321
LEDs
bargraph display  187–92buffering three LEDs with a
74HC04  123
driving a high-power IR LED
transmitter  132
flashing with 
HARDWARE
DELAY 200–5
flashing with ON-OFF
SWITCH 416–22
flashing with SOFTWARE
DELAY 208–14
flashing with SWITCH
INTERFACE SOFTWARE
404–9
flashing with Timer 1
239–42
low-current LEDs  114time displays on an 
MX LED
DISPLAY 458–64
light bulbs
automatic lights  925–30controlling brightness of
834–9
detecting a blown bulb
805–6
lighting with 
MOSFET DRIVER
142–3
Max489 transceivers  650–74Max810M  79memory
adding more than 64 kbytes
of code memory 104–7
adding ROM and RAM
memory  103
external RAM and internal
SRAM on the Dallas8XC520  98–9
external RAM and internal
XRAM on the C509 98
internal XRAM memory on
C515C  93
Philips 8XC552 internal
memory  91–2
speed of access to memory
areas  92
microphone pre-amplifier  780minimal Atmel 89C2051  75minimal Dallas circuit  79–80menu-driven 3-
LEVEL PWM
823–9
network with Max489
transceivers  650–74
on-chip ADC and PWM
hardware  812–17
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 914–18
open-loop DC motor control
(MOSFET DRIVER )143
open-loop DC motor control
(SSR DRIVER )147
output-only library  396
PC LINK (RS-232) library
374–86
PROJECT HEADER 172
PWM smoothing filter  821reading 8 switch inputs in a
hostile environment412–13
reading and writing bits
179–83
reading and writing bytes
178–9
reducing the component count
103–4
rotational speed measurement
319–20
schedulers
255-
TICK SCHEDULER
896–910
CAN-based scheduler
686–710
core scheduler library  280–7generic 
CO-OPERATIVE
SCHEDULER with 16–bit
timing  288–96HYBRID SCHEDULER 341–57
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER
914–18
SCC SCHEDULER 686–710
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )
595–604
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)
precise timer ticks andstandard baud rates 562–3traffic lights  563–92
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
644
SOFTWARE PRM on the 8051
751–5
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT
library  737–40
speaker drivers  858–9speech playback  845–52, 856speech-recognition system
800–1
SPI PERIPHERAL
core library  527–30SPI-based ADC  536, 763–7using an EEPROM  530–6
SSRs in telecommunication
applications  146–7
temperature sensors  515–19,
933–40
timeouts
generating timeout-based
delays  314–15
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 308–14
LOOP TIMEOUT 301–4
traffic lights  328–31
using SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )
595–604
using SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)
563–62
using SCU SCHEDULER
(RS-232) 644
using SCU SCHEDULER
(RS-485) 650–74
using SCC SCHEDULER
686–710
transferring floats between
microcontrollers 714–15
UART
adding an additional UART
640–1
scheduler library  616–39
watchdogs
1232 external watchdog
timer  219–22
internal watchdog timer on
the Atmel 89S53 223–7INDEX 989www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1015 ---
EXTENDED 8051 39, 46–52
alternative solutions  50hardware components  48, 49memory  48performance levels  48pin count  48portability  49–50ports  174power consumption  49reliability and safety  49
external code memory  100–8external crystal oscillator mod-
ules  54, 58–9
external DACs  843–4external data memory  88external parallel ADC  761, 772–6external serial ADC  761, 763–7,
767–72
external watchdog chips  217–18EZ-USB range  373
FFT (Fourier transform)  718
FilterLab  798filters
continuous-time  799design packages  798high-frequency  786low-pass  795–6, 797op-amp  777, 797–8, 799, 858pulse-width modulation
819–20
sinc filter  854switched-capacitor  798–9see also A-A (anti-aliasing) filter
flash ADCs  787flash ROM  85flashing an LED
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
259–60, 269, 288–96
HARDWARE DELAY 200
ON-OFF SWITCH interface
416–22
SOFTWARE DELAY 206–7,
208–14
SOFTWARE PRM 748–50
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )
404–9
timer-driven routine  239–42
flow control in RS-232
communication protocol364–5
Fortune, J.  552Fourier transform (FFT)  718Fowler, M.  15, 16Franklin, G.F.  873, 874
frequency distortion  844frequency-domain signal
representation  818–19
Fuerst, W.  786, 800Full CAN  678full-duplex serial communication
system  362
function keys  438, 439function pointers  255–8,
268–70, 277
reliability and safety  269–70
fuses  131fuzzy control  874
galvanic cells  919, 920
Gamma, E.  22, 24Ganssle, J.  22global positioning system (GPS)
receivers  60
glucose sensors  873graphic displays  465
Ha, R.  252
half-duplex serial communication
system  362
‘hanging’ applications  217, 298
HARDWARE DELAY 194–205,
314–15
portability  198–9reliability and safety  198timers/counters  194–7, 198–9
HARDWARE PRM (pulse-rate
modulation)  742–7
alternative solutions  744duty cycles  742portability  744reliability and safety  744
HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT
728–35
alternative solutions  730–1generic library  731–5portability  730reliability and safety  730
HARDWARE PWM (pulse-width
modulation)  808–17
buffer limitations  810driver limitations  810duty cycle  808–9external hardware  809on-chip hardware  809portability  811reliability and safety  811smoothing outputs  810
switching frequency  809–10
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 305–15
portability  308reliability and safety  308testing  308–14
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 215–27
external watchdog chips
217–18
1232 external timer  217,
219–22
portability  218reliability and safety  218
Hatley, D.J.  16, 17, 19HD44780 (LCD) components
465–6, 467–72
header files
PORT HEADER 184–92
PROJECT HEADER 161, 169–72
heat sink  156–7high-frequency filters  786
see also A-A (anti-aliasing) filter
Hill, W.  110Hitachi LCD panel controller
(HD44780)  465–6, 467–72
Horowitz, P.  110Huang, H-W  410
HYBRID SCHEDULER 247, 248,
332–57
portability  341reliability and safety  248, 334,
338–41
hydrofoil communication
systems  853–5
hydrophones  782Hyperterminal application  370
I2C bus  494–502
ACKNOWLEDGE signal
499–500
byte format  499clock signal generation/
synchronization  497, 500
code size  501data transfers  498–500device addresses  496–7error-checking mechanisms
502–3
execution speed  501external serial (I2C) ADC
767–72
flexibility  501licence fees  502load capacitance  495, 501INDEX 990www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1016 ---
main application areas  501
Masters and Slaves  497,
499–500
NOT ACKNOWLEDGE signal
499–500
scalability  501serial clock (SCL) lines  495,
499
serial data (SDA) lines  495,
499
START condition  499STOP condition  499suitability of  502temperature sensor  933–40
I2C libraries
core library  503–10EEPROM interface  496, 503,
510–15
LOOP TIMEOUT 303–4
temperature sensor interface
498, 515–19
I2C PERIPHERAL 303–4, 491,
493–519
hardware features  494–502portability  503reliability and safety  502–3
IC BUFFER 118–23
finding an IC  119–20logic families  120–2portability  122–3reliability and safety  122
IC DRIVER 134–8
current sinks  134–6error code displays  137–8portability  137reliability and safety  136–7
IDATA memory  86, 92idle operating mode  36–7, 271indicator light circuits  9–10indirect addressing  82–3inductive AC loads  152–3inductive DC loads  129–31inductive kick  129, 152Infineon
analogue/digital converter  760C167  34C501  33, 34, 36C505C  46C509  98, 872C515C  46, 93, 386–96,
686–710, 760, 776,788–92, 809, 812–17
C517  872C541  373CAN support  678
EXTENDED 8051 46
internal ADC  788–92memory options  89–90, 93,
98–9
on-chip ADC  812–17pulse-width modulation signal
generation  809
PWM hardware  812–17watchdog chips  218
information systems (ISs)  3–5infra-red (IR) LEDs  132initialization function  262–3inrush currents  128, 152instruction registers  470insulin delivery systems  873Intel
8048 microcontroller  308052 microcontroller  30–180251 microcontroller  39memory options  90
intelligent data-acquisition
541–3
intelligent sensors  541–3internal ‘external’ memory  88interrupt inputs and 
PORT I /O
178
interrupts
and CODE memory  236definition  10–11external interrupts  561one interrupt per
microcontroller rule  263
priority levels  12–13
SCC SCHEDULER 680
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)555
shared-clock schedulers
(UART–based)  610
timer-based  235–9UART-related  235
Keil hardware simulator  275–7
KEYPAD INTERFACE 433–48
buffer arrangements  438, 439code library  439–48function keys  438, 439and 
LCD CHARACTER PANEL
484–90
matrix of switches  434–5and memory  438portability  439QWERTY keypad  439reliability and safety  439scanning function  435–8shared-clock scheduler  439
keypad scanning  435–8Knott, G.  8Kopetz, H.  11
Labrosse, J.J.  252
lamps see light bulbsLander, C.W.  131latch combinations and clock
frequency/speed  97, 100–1
latching switches  401–2latency  613, 681–3Lawrenz, W.  675
LCD CHARACTER PANEL (liquid
crystal display)  321,465–90
address counter  470–1back lighting  472busy flag (BF)  470Character Generator (CG) RAM
(in HD44780) 470
character set  469contrast adjustment
connection  472
cursor/blink control circuit  470data bus  472Display Data (DD) RAM (in
HD44780)  467
4-bit interface  471HD44780 components  465–6,
467–72
and 
KEYPAD INTERFACE
484–90
memory locations  469on-board controller  465–6portability  473power consumption  465registers  470reliability and safety  472software library  472time displays  473–84updating  321
LCD (liquid crystal displays)
graphic displays  321, 465
LED (light-emitting diodes)
bargraph display  187–92buffers and connecting up
LEDs  112
driving multiple LEDs  118–19,
123
error code displays  137–8infra-red (IR) LEDs  132multi-segment LED displays
450–1INDEX 991www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1017 ---
LED (light-emitting diodes) 
continued
MX LED DISPLAY 449–64
NAKED LED 110–14
and ports  453, 456see also flashing an LED
Leen, G.  252, 539level shifting circuits  778–9level-shifter IC  140Leveson, N.G.  552Li, Y.  723licence fees  502, 524light bulbs
automatic light  925-30brightness control  823–30,
834–9
detecting a blown bulb  805–6pulse-width modulation  807switching on  128, 142–3, 152
light-emitting diodes see LEDLinear Technology
switched-capacitor filters  799watchdog chips  217
linear/non-linear control systems
863–4
liquid crystal displays see LCDlithium cell batteries  923–4Liu, J.W.S.  252load capacitance in I2C protocol
495, 501
local networks  608
hardware and wiring  684
Locke, C.D.  251locking mechanisms  248–50,
338–9, 341
logic families  120–2
LONG TASK 716–19
portability  718reliability and safety  718
loop time in
PID CONTROLLER
872
LOOP TIMEOUT 299–304
I2C library  303–4portability  300reliability and safety  300test program for  301–3
low-pass filter  795–6, 797Lynn, P.  786, 800
machine cycle periods see
performance levels
Mariutti, P.  58mask read-only memory  84Master node  610, 611–13, 679–81matrix arrangements of switches
434–5
Maxim
continuous-time filters  799LED drivers  456Max127 ADC  767Max150  772Max232  365Max270  799Max275  799Max541  857Max1110 ADC  763Max7408  799
ROBUST RESET 77, 78, 79
switch debouncing  411switched-capacitor filters  799voltage-mode DACs  857watchdog chips  217
measuring speed see speed
measurement
memory  81–108
areas of memory  85–90bank-switched arrangements
104–7
Character Generator (CG) RAM
(in HD44780)  470
and clock frequency/speed  97,
100–1
and co-operative scheduling
274
Display Data (DD) RAM (in
HD44780)  467
EEPROM  85, 496, 503, 510–15,
530–6
and 
EXTENDED 8051 48
and KEYPAD INTERFACE 438
locations in LCD CHARACTER
PANEL 469
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY
100–8
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 94–9
ON-CHIP MEMORY 82–93
and ONE-TASK SCHEDULER
913
in PC LINK (RS-232) 371
reducing requirements  894
SMALL 8051 42
speed of access  92
STANDARD 8051 34–5
types of memory  83–5
memory access and PORT I /O
177
message bytes  611message structure
SCC SCHEDULER 680–1
shared-clock schedulers
(UART-based)  610–12
Microchip
filter-design packages  798MCP601  777PIC 12CE673 as alternative to
SMALL 8051 44
microphone pre-amplifier  780Microwire interface  523MISO (Master in Slave out) data
line (SPI)  522
MISRA  12modems  146–7
MOSFET DRIVER 139–43, 803–4
portability  142reliability and safety  141–2
MOSI (Master out Slave in) data
line (SPI)  522
Motorola  521MP240D3 SSR (Crydon)  158multi–drop communication  373,
646
multi-point communication  373,
646
multi-segment LED displays
450–1
MULTI -STAGE TASK 317–21
LCD library  321portability  319reliability and safety  319rotational speed measurement
319–20
temperature monitoring system
317–19
MULTI -STATE SWITCH 397,
423–32
incrementing a counter
424–32
portability  424reliability and safety  424
MULTI -STATE TASK 322–31
portability  328reliability and safety  328System Update task  324traffic light system  328–31
multiplexed LED displays see
MX LED DISPLAY
multiprocessor applications
711–24
DATA UNION 712–15
DOMINO TASK 720–4
LONG TASK 716–19INDEX 992www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1018 ---
multitasking  243–5, 247–8,
338–40
see also multiprocessor 
applications; MULTI -STAGE
TASK ; MULTI -STATE TASK
MX LED DISPLAY 449–64
hardware requirements  451–4multi-segment LED displays
450, 451, 454
portability  456reliability and safety  455–6software code  454–5time displays  455–64updating modules  455, 456
NAKED LED 110–14
connecting up LEDs  112portability  113pull-up resistors  111–12reliability and safety  112
NAKED LOAD 115–17
portability  116reliability and safety  116
National Semiconductor  523
analogue-to-digital converters
(ADC)  731
LM12CL  858-9power amplifiers  858–9
networks
CAN (controller area networks)
545–7, 675–710
distributed networks  608, 646,
683, 684
local networks  608, 684Max489 transceivers  650–74node errors  547–50resetting networks  550shutting down  549wiring 614,  684
Nichols, N.B.  871nine volt radio batteries  923Nise, N.S. 866,  873Nissanke, N.  12, 250nodes
errors  547–50hardware  613–14Master node  610, 611–13,
679–81
redundant nodes  551Slave node  610, 611, 613,
680–1
wiring  684
non-linear control systems
863–4normally closed (NC) switches
402
normally open (NO) switches
402
NOT ACKNOWLEDGE signal
(I2C)  499–500
NPN transistor switches  124–5,
127
Nyquist frequency  784, 794
object databases  5
OBSERVER 22, 23–4
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY 100–8
bank-switched memory
arrangements  104–7
portability  102reliability and safety  102
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 94–9
portability  97–8reliability and safety  96–7
on-chip DACs  842–3
ON-CHIP MEMORY 82–93
areas of memory  85–90controlling access to  88–9direct addressing  82–3indirect addressing  82–3portability  91reliability and safety  91speed of access  92types of memory  83–5
on-chip oscillators  60–1on-chip reset circuits  78, 79–80on-chip (voltage-mode) ADC
759–60
ON-OFF SWITCH 397, 414–22
for AC loads  152–3for DC loads  128–31portability  416reliability and safety  416switch block counter  415
ONE-SHOT ADC (analogue-to-
digital converter) 757–76
alternative solutions  762–3analogue voltage measurement
757–61
current measurement  758–61current-mode sensor 
components  761
external parallel ADC  772–6external parallel (voltage-mode)
ADC  761
external serial (I2C) ADC
767–72
external serial (SPI) ADC  763–7external serial (voltage-mode)
ADC 761
on-chip (voltage-mode) ADC
759–60
port pins and  761portability  762potentiometers  757–8, 762–3and power consumption  762reliability and safety  762
one-shot tasks  234, 243
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 893,
911–18
alternative solutions  913and CPU load  913load assessment  914–18and memory  913reliability and safety  913and timers  913
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 893,
919–30
alternative solutions  924automatic light  925–30portability  924reliability and safety  924see also batteries
Ong, H.L.R.  811open-loop control systems
861–4, 873, 876
operating systems  5, 231–2, 944operational amplifiers  777,
797–8, 799, 858
Oppenheim, A.V.  786oscillator cycles  33–4, 55oscillator drift  559oscillator failure  560oscillator frequency  55–6, 57,
274–6
0 MHz  56battery-powered applications
922
choosing  61–2
oscillator hardware
CERAMIC RESONATOR 64–6
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 54–63
on-chip oscillators  60–1RC oscillators (relaxation
oscillators)  61
RC RESET 73
over-sampling signals  800OVERLAY directive  268
P-only controllers  867
parallel ADC  772–6parallel (voltage-mode) ADC  761INDEX 993www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1019 ---
Parikh, C.R.  723
payroll systems  4
PC LINK (RS-232) 361–96
baud rate generation  366,
367–8, 386–96, 520
cable connections  365–6
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 368–9,
372
error checking  372link library  374–86memory problems  371multi-drop communications
373
output-only library  396PC software  370portability  372reliability and safety  371–2SCON special function register
367
serial port control  366–7software architecture  366transceiver chip  365USB (universal serial bus) ports
373
voltage level conversion  365see also RS-232 protocol
PCA82c250 (Philips)  683PDATA memory  88, 92performance levels
EXTENDED 8051 48
and oscillator frequency  55
SMALL 8051 42
STANDARD 8051 33–4
Perier, L.  9periodic tasks  234, 243personal computers see desktop
systems
Philips
8XC552  1–2, 29880c751  4187LPC764  41, 61, 922CAN support  679, 683
EXTENDED 8051 48
extended memory devices  81memory options  90, 91–2, 103PCA82c250  683
SMALL 8051 41, 42
XA-family  52
PID CONTROLLER 252, 860–89
bandwidth  871–2closed-loop control systems
864–5
control algorithms  865–72,
876control parameters  871
cruise-control system  874–8DC motor speed control
879–88
fuzzy control  874limitations of  873linear/non-linear control
systems  863–4
loop time  872open-loop control systems
861–4, 873, 876
P-only controllers  867portability  873reliability and safety  872sample rate for control systems
871–2
tuning the controller  877–8windup protection  869–70
Pierce oscillator  54piezoelectric buzzers  116–17pins see port pinsPirbhai, I.A.  16, 17, 19PNP transistor switch  124–5pointers see function pointersPont, M.J.  16, 24, 37, 957
PORT HEADER 184–92
portability  187reliability and safety  186
PORT I /O174–83
bitwise operators  179–83interrupt inputs  178and memory access  177portability  177reading and writing from ports
174–6
bits  179–83bytes  178–9
reliability and safety  176–7reset values  176–7sbit variables  176special function registers (SFR)
174–5
port pins/ports
ALE pin  91, 95and 
DAC OUTPUT 844
driving DC loads  109
EXTENDED 8051 48
header files  184–92and LED displays  453, 456and matrix of switches  434–5and 
ONE-SHOT ADC 761
RESET pin  68SCK pin  525and 
SEQUENTIAL ADC 788serial port control  366–7
SMALL 8051 42–3, 174
STANDARD 8051 35–6
USB (universal serial bus) ports
373
portability
3-LEVEL PWM 823
255- TICK SCHEDULER 895
A-A FILTER 800
ADC PRE -AMP 779
BJT DRIVER 131
CERAMIC RESONATOR 65
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 279
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 60
CURRENT SENSOR 805
DAC DRIVER 857
DAC OUTPUT 844
DAC SMOOTHER 856
DATA UNION 714
DOMINO TASK 722
EMR DRIVER 153
EXTENDED 805 1 49–50
HARDWARE DELA Y  198–9
HARDWARE PRM 744
HARDWARE PULSE –COUNT 730
HARDWARE PWM 811
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 308
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 218
HYBRID SCHEDULER 341
I2C PERIPHERAL 503
IC BUFFER 122–3
IC DRIVER 137
KEYPAD INTERFACE 439
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 473
LONG TASK 718
LOOP TIMEOUT 300
MOSFET DRIVER 142
MULTI -STAGE TASK 319
MULTI -STATE SWITCH 424
MULTI -STATE TASK 328
MX LED DISPLAY 456
NAKED LED 113
NAKED LOAD 116
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY 102
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 97–8
ON-CHIP MEMORY 91
ON-OFF SWITCH 416
ONE-SHOT ADC 762
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 924
PC LINK (RS-232) 372
PID CONTROLLER 873
PORT HEADER 187
PORT I /O177
PROJECT HEADER 171–2INDEX 994www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1020 ---
PWM SMOOTHER 820
RC RESET 74
ROBUST RESET 78
SCC SCHEDULE R  686
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )594
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)561
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )615
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
643
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
649
SEQUENTIAL ADC 788
SMALL 8051 44
SOFTWARE DELAY 207
SOFTWARE PRM 751
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT 736
SOFTWARE PWM 833
SPI PERIPHERAL 525
SSR DRIVER (AC)157
SSR DRIVER (DC)146
STABLE SCHEDULER 933
STANDARD 8051 38
SUPER LOOP 165
SWITCH INTERFACE
(HARDWARE )412
SWITCH INTERFACE
(SOFTWARE )403
potentiometers  757–8, 762–3power amplifiers  858–9power consumption
and 
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
271
EXTENDED 8051 49
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 465
ONE-SHOT ADC 762
SEQUENTIAL ADC 788
SMALL 8051 43
STANDARD 8051 36–7
power supply design/disruption
72–3, 73–4, 77
power-down operating mode  37pre-emptive scheduler  246–53,
338–40
code complexity  252compared to 
CO-OPERATIVE
SCHEDULER 250–2
pre-emptive tasks  334–5, 340–1printf() function  371–2programmable read-only (PROM)
memory  84
PROJECT HEADER 161, 169–72
portability  171–2reliability and safety  171typedef statements  171–2proportional-integral-differential
(PID) control see 
PID
CONTROLLER
PSEN (program store enable)  95
pull-up resistors  111–12, 122, 125,
136, 141, 145, 149, 156
pulse counting  728–30pulse stream  741pulse-rate modulated output
748–50
pulse-rate modulation  741–55
HARDWARE PRM 742–7
SOFTWARE PRM 748–55
pulse-rate sensing  727–40
HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT
728–35
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT 731,
736–40
pulse-width modulation  807–39
filters  819–20frequency-domain signal 
representation  818–19
HARDWARE PWM 808–17
noise removal  819
PWM SMOOTHER 818–21
SOFTWARE PWM 831–9
3-LEVEL PWM 822–30
time-domain signal 
representation  818
push-button double-pole, 
double-throw (PB-DPDT)switch  403
push-button switch  401–3PWM (pulse-width modulation)
filters  819–20
PWM SMOOTHER 818–21
portability  820reliability and safety  820
quantized sine wave  854–5
quartz crystal oscillator see
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR
quiescent state  363QWERTY keypad  439
radar control system  861–2, 865
radio battery  923RAM (random access memory)
83–5
Rashid, M.H.  131RC oscillator (relaxation
oscillator) 61
RC RESET 68–76
active low inputs 75–6brownouts  73–4
and oscillation  73portability  74power supply design/
disruption  72–3, 73–4, 77
reliability and safety  72RESET buttons  71–2reset cycle  73values of R and C  69–71
RC snubber  153–4RCV420 (Burr-Brown)  761RD (data read)  95read-write memory  83–5reading and writing from ports
174–6
real-time system  6–8recharging batteries  919–20, 924rectangular-wave output  748redundant networks/nodes
551–2
reed relay  149refresh function  219register
and 
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 470
SPI control register  525–6see also special function 
register (SFR)
relational database system  4–5relaxation oscillator  61relay
electromagnetic  144, 145electromechanical  149, 152,
155
reed relays  149
SSR DRIVER (AC)156–8
SSR DRIVER (DC)144–7
reliability and safety
function pointers  269–70shared-clock schedulers  550–2
3-LEVEL PWM 823
255- TICK SCHEDULER 895
A-A FILTER 799
ADC PRE -AMP 779
BJT DRIVER 128–31
CERAMIC RESONATOR 65
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER 246,
276–9
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 58–60
CURRENT SENSOR 805
DAC DRIVER 857
DAC OUTPUT 844
DAC SMOOTHER 855
DATA UNION 713–14
DOMINO TASK 722INDEX 995www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1021 ---
reliability and safety continued
EMR DRIVER 150–3
EXTENDED 8051 49
HARDWARE DELAY 198
HARDWARE PRM 744
HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT 730
HARDWARE PWM 811
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 308
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 218
HYBRID SCHEDULER 248, 334,
338–41
I2C PERIPHERAL 502–3
IC BUFFER 122
IC DRIVER 136–7
KEYPAD INTERFACE 439
LCD CHARACTER PANEL 472
LONG TASK 718
LOOP TIMEOUT 300
MOSFET DRIVER 141–2
MULTI -STAGE TASK 319
MULTI -STATE SWITCH 424
MULTI -STATE TASK 328
MX LED DISPLAY 455–6
NAKED LED 112
NAKED LOAD 116
OFF-CHIP CODE MEMORY 102
OFF-CHIP DATA MEMORY 96–7
ON-CHIP MEMORY 91
ON-OFF SWITCH 416
ONE-SHOT ADC 762
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 913
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 924
PC LINK (RS-232) 371–2
PC LINK (RS-232) 872
PORT HEADER 186
PORT I /O176–7
PROJECT HEADER 171
PWM SMOOTHER 820
RC RESET 72
ROBUST RESET 78
SCC SCHEDULER 685
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )594
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)557–61
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL ) 615
SCU SCHEDULER (RS–232) 642
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485) 649
SEQUENTIAL ADC 788
SMALL 8051 44
SOFTWARE DELAY 207
SOFTWARE PRM 751
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT 736
SOFTWARE PWM 833
SPI PERIPHERAL 525
SSR DRIVER (AC)156–7SSR DRIVER (DC)  145
STABLE SCHEDULER 933
STANDARD 8051 37–8
SUPER LOOP 164
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )
411
SWITCH INTERFACE
(SOFTWARE )401–3
repeater boards (repeaters)  608report status function  272–4RESET buttons  71–2reset cycle  73reset hardware  67–80
RC RESET 68–76
ROBUST RESET 77–80
RESET pin  68reset values  176–7resistors
current-sense resistors  802–3pull-up resistors  111–12, 122,
125, 136, 141, 145, 149,156
resonators see
CERAMIC RESONATOR
ROBUST RESET 77–80
on-chip reset circuits  78, 79–80portability  78reliability and safety  78
ROM (read-only memory)  83–5rotary encoders  319
see also pulse-rate sensing
rotary switch interface  401–2rotational speed measurement
319–20, 727
HARDWARE PULSE -COUNT
728–35
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT 731,
736–40
see also DC motor control
RS-232 protocol  362–5, 524
asynchronous data transmission
364, 368, 520
baud rates  364, 520compared to RS-485  646–8
CRYSTAL OSCILLATOR 368–9
definition  362–3encoding data  363error checking  372flow control  364–5quiescent state  363start bit  363stop bit  364voltage levels  364, 365see also 
PC LINK (RS-232) ;
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)RS-485 protocol  608, 646–8
see also SCU SCHEDULER
(RS-485)
Rumbaugh, J. 16
safety see reliability and safety
safety monitoring systems  841sample frequency
for control systems  871–2DAC OUTPUT  842Nyquist criterion  784, 794over-sampling signals  800
SEQUENTIAL ADC 783–5
sbit variables  176SBUF  367scalability
of I2C protocol  501of 
SPI PERIPHERAL 523
scanning keypads  435–8
SCC SCHEDULER 677–710
architecture  679baud rate  681Infineon C515c  686–710interrupt generation  680Master node  679–81message structure  680–1node wiring  684portability  686reliability and safety  685Slave node  680–1software for  685tick latency  681–3timer overflow  680transceivers  683Update function  680
schedulers  231–53
255- TICK SCHEDULER 893,
894–910
CO-OPERATIVE SCHEDULER
246–53, 255–96, 716
core scheduler library  280–96cyclic scheduling  251definition  245error code displays  183, 272–4
HYBRID SCHEDULER 247, 248,
332–57
integration of scheduler and
application  944–5
memory requirements  894and 
MX LED DISPLAY 455–6
ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 893,
911–18
ONE-YEAR SCHEDULER 893,
919–30INDEX 996www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1022 ---
pre-emptive scheduler  246–53,
338–40
pulse-rate modulated output
748–50
STABLE SCHEDULER 932–40
temperature-compensated
schedulers  931–40
see also shared-clock schedulers
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )593–607
hardware requirements  593portability  594reliability and safety  594traffic light control system
595–607
Master node  595–601Slave node  602–7
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)554–92
alternative solutions  561–2baud rates  562error handling  561hardware requirements  558interrupt generation  555
external interrupts  561
oscillator drift  559oscillator failure  560portability  561reliability and safety  557–61tick messages  555, 562traffic light control system
563–92
Master node  582–8Slave node  588–92tick and acknowledgement
messages  582–92
update function  555voltage level change  556
SCK pin  525SCON special function register
367
Scott, K.  15, 16
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )
609–41
adding an additional UART
640–1
Address bytes  611–12architecture  609–10baud rate  612–13Data bytes  611–12interrupt generation  610Master node  610, 611–13message structure  610–12network wiring  614node hardware  613–14portability  615reliability and safety  615
Slave node  610, 611, 613tick latency  613tick rate  612–13timer overflow  610UART scheduler library  616–41
Master software  617–30Slave software  630–40
Update function  610
SCU SCHEDULER (RS–232) 642–5
portability  643reliability and safety  642
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
646–74
enable inputs  648network with Max489
transceivers  650–74
Master software  650–64Slave software  664–74
portability  649reliability and safety  649
Selic, B.  16semaphore mechanisms  248,
338
sensors
CURRENT SENSOR 802–6
current-mode sensor
components  761
glucose sensors  873intelligent sensors  541–3temperature sensors  59, 498,
515–19, 932–3, 933–40
SEQUENTIAL ADC 782–93
bandwidth of signals  784–5bit rate  786conversion times  787high-frequency filters  786library code  788–92port pins and  788portability  788power consumption  788reliability and safety  788sample frequency  783–5, 794software architecture  786–7
serial clock (SCL) lines  495, 499serial data (SDA) lines  495, 499serial (I2C) ADC  767–72serial peripheral interface see SPIserial port control  366–7serial (SPI) ADC  763–7serial (voltage-mode) ADC  761shared-clock schedulers  539–52
backup slave  550CAN-based  675–710clock synchronization  543–5
data transfer  545–6
KEYPAD INTERFACE 439
modular design benefits  541–3network and node errors
547–50
reliability and safety  550–2resetting networks  550
SCC SCHEDULER 677–710
SCI SCHEDULER (DATA )
593–607
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)554–92
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )
609–41
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
642–5
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
646–74
shutting down networks  549task structure  716–17watchdog timers  548
Sharp, R.S.  9short task handling  716–19simplex serial communication
system  362
sinc compensation  854sinc filter  854single-pole switches  402–3sink drivers  134–6SISO (single-input single-output)
systems  863, 873
Sivasothy, S.  608Slave node  610, 611, 613, 680–1Sleep function  271
SMALL 8051 39, 41–5
alternative solutions  44hardware components  42, 44memory  42performance levels  42pin count  42–3portability  44ports  174power consumption  43reliability and safety  44
Smith, S.W.  854smoothing signals
DAC SMOOTHER 853–6
PWM SMOOTHER 818–21
software application labels  3
SOFTWARE DELAY 206–14
portability  207reliability and safety  207
software design limitations
16–21INDEX 997www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1023 ---
software patterns  22–6
SOFTWARE PRM (pulse-rate
modulation)  748–55
flashing an LED  748–50generic code  751–5portability  751reliability and safety  751variable-frequency software
PRM  750
SOFTWARE PULSE -COUNT 731,
736–40
generic library  737–40maximum pulse rate  736portability  736reliability and safety  736
SOFTWARE PWM (pulse-width
modulation)  831–9
frequency increases  834portability  833reliability and safety  833
software watchdogs  219solid-state relay see 
SSR DRIVER
(AC); SSR DRIVER (DC)
speakers  858–9special function registers (SFR)
174–5
memory  87SCON  367TCON  194TMOD  194WCON  223
spectrum analyzer  785speech recognition systems
784–5, 794, 800–1
speech signals
digitally transmitted  854level shifting  778playback using 12-bit parallel
DAC  845–52, 856
speed measurement  319–20, 727
see also DC motor control;
pulse-rate sensing
SPI PERIPHERAL 521–36
clock polarities  522clock rate  522–3clock signal generation  522code size  523control register  525–6data lines  522data transfer  522execution speed  523flexibility  523history of  521libraries
core library  527–30external EEPROM  530–6
licence fees  524main application areas  523Microwire interface  523portability  525reliability and safety  525scalability  523SCK pin  525serial (SPI) ADC  763–7stability of  524
square-wave output  748
SSR DRIVER (AC)156–8
heat sink  156–7portability  157reliability and safety  156–7
SSR DRIVER (DC)144–7
portability  146reliability and safety  145in telecommunications
equipment  146–7
STABLE SCHEDULER 932–40
portability  933reliability and safety  933
STANDARD 8051 30–4
alternative solutions  39clock speeds  34hardware components  35, 37,
38
idle operating mode  36–7linking together  50, 540–1,
543–52
memory architecture  34–5oscillator cycles  33–4, 55performance levels  33–4pin count  35–6portability  38power consumption  36–7power-down operating mode
37
reliability and safety  37–8
start bit  363Start function  270static RAM (SRAM)  84stop bit  364Storey, N.  12, 551successive-approximation ADCs
787
SUPER LOOP 161–8, 233–5
portability  165reliability and safety  164switch interface  412–13
switch block counter  415switch interface  412–13
debouncing  399–400, 402,
410–11
in industrial environments
397, 410–13
latching switches  401–2matrix of switches  434–5
MULTI -STATE SWITCH 397,
423–32
push-button switches  401–3rotary switch interface  401–2single-pole switches  402–3see also 
ON-OFF SWITCH
SWITCH INTERFACE (HARDWARE )
397, 410–13
portability  412reliability and safety  411
SWITCH INTERFACE (SOFTWARE )
397, 399–409
electrostatic discharge (ESD)
403
flashing an LED  404–9normally closed (NC) switches
402
normally open (NO) switches
402
out-of-range inputs 403portability  403push-button double-pole,
double-throw (PB-DPDT)switch  403
reliability and safety  401–3
switched-capacitor filters  798–9switching frequency  809–10synchronization see clock
synchronization
synchronous communication
protocol  520
System Update task  324
task array  261, 277
task duration  234–5, 243–5, 252,
297, 333
and multiprocessor systems
720–1
task jitter  268task overlap  277, 278task structure  716–17
consecutively scheduled tasks
720–4
long and short task handling
716–19
worst case execution time
(WCET)  716INDEX 998www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1024 ---
task-oriented design  316–31
MULTI -STAGE TASK 317–21
MULTI -STATE TASK 322–31
TCON special function register
194
TDMA (time division multiple
access) protocol  543, 546
Temic CAN support  679temperature monitoring system
317–19, 762
temperature sensors  59, 498,
515–19, 932–3, 933–40
temperature-compensated crystal
oscillator (TCXOs)  59,931, 932
temperature-compensated
schedulers  931–40
Texas Instruments, TUSB3200
373
text displays see LCD (liquid
crystal displays) characterpanel
thermistors 128, 1523-LEVEL PWM (pulse-width
modulation)  822–30
menu-driven example  823–30portability  823reliability and safety  823Timer 2 and  822
tick intervals  263, 278–9tick latency  613, 681–3tick messages  555, 562tick rate  612–13time displays  455–64, 473–84time division multiple access
(TDMA) protocol  543, 546
time–domain signal
representation  818
time-triggered systems  11–13timeout patterns
HARDWARE TIMEOUT 305–15
LOOP TIMEOUT 299–304
timer ISR  219timer overflow
SCC SCHEDULER 680
SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )610
timer-based interrupts  235–9timers
auto-reload timers  197, 238–9and co-operative scheduling
274
and 
HARDWARE DELAY 194–7,
198–9
increment rates  1981232 external timer  217,
219–22
and ONE-TASK SCHEDULER 913
and speed measurement
systems  320
timer 0  194–7, 198, 728–30timer 1  194–7, 198, 367,
728–30
timer 2  197, 198, 238–9
as a baud-rate generator  743clock-out mode  743and 
HARDWARE PWM 810
and 3-LEVEL PWM 822
see also counters; HARDWARE
WATCHDOG
TMOD special function register
(SFR)  194
traffic light control system
328–31, 543–7, 563–92,595–607
Master node  582–8, 595–601Slave node  588–92, 602–7tick and acknowledgement
messages  582–92
transceiver chip  365transceivers  683transconductance amplifier
843–4
transistors
Darlington pair  858NPN transistor switch 124–5,
127
PNP transistor switch  124–5see also BJT DRIVER
(bipolar-junctiontransistor); 
MOSFET DRIVER
TRIAC switch  156TTL logic family  120–2Turkish Airlines  551–2
255- TICK SCHEDULER 893,
894–910
data structure  894–5generic code  896–910portability  895reliability and safety  895
typedef statements  171–2
UART-based shared-clock
schedulers
adding an additional UART
640–1
data transfer  608, 675interrupts  235scheduler library  616–41SCU SCHEDULER (LOCAL )
609–41
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-232)
642–5
SCU SCHEDULER (RS-485)
646–74
UDN2585A buffer  451–3, 454UDN2585A driver series  135–6ULN2803 driver series  134–5UML 15underwater pressure transducer
782
Unified Modelling Language
(UML)  15
union (C/C++) keyword see 
DATA
UNION
Update function  263–4, 268,
336–7, 555, 610, 680
USB (universal serial bus) ports
373
user interfaces 359UV-erasable programmable read-
only (UV-EPROM)  84
variable-frequency software PRM
750
vibration monitoring  785Volta, Alessandro  919voltage
amplification  777–8, 780of batteries  922measurement of  757–61in RS-232 protocol  364, 365in 
SCI SCHEDULER (TICK)556
voltage-mode ADC  761voltage-mode DAC  843, 857
Waites, N.  8
warning devices  113washing machine control system
322–8
watchdog support  274watchdog timers  548watchdogs
HARDWARE WATCHDOG 215–27
software watchdogs  219
waveform storage  5WCON special function registers
(SFR)  223
web site  982Wellings, A.  543, 546whale song  782–3Winbond microcontrollers  34
WINDOW PLACE 22, 23INDEX 999www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd

--- Page 1025 ---
windup protection  869–70
worst case execution time
(WCET)  716
WR (data write)  95writing from ports  174–6XA-family (Philips)  52
XDATA memory  88, 89, 92Xilinx Foundation  51XTR105 (Burr-Brown)  761XTR110 (Burr-Brown)  843–4Yalamanchili, S.  51
Yourdon, E.N. 1 5, 16
zero-crossing detection  151
Ziegler, J.G.  871INDEX 1000www.SafeTTy.net
Copyright (c) 2014 SafeTTy Systems Ltd
