
--- Page 1 (No text found) ---

--- Page 2 ---
BIRMINGHAM—MUMBAI
Embedded Linux Development Using Yocto
Project
Copyright © 2023 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations
embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained in
this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the
author(s), nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held
liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or
indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of
the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of
capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this
information.
Group Product Manager: Mohd Riyan Khan
Publishing Product Manager: Mohd Riyan Khan
Content Development Editor: Sujata Tripathi
Technical Editor: Arjun Varma
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Project Coordinator: Sean Lobo
Proofreader: Safis Editing

--- Page 3 ---
Indexer: Rekha Nair
Production Designer: Aparna Bhagat
Marketing Coordinator: Marylou Dmello
First published: July 2014
Second edition: November 2017
Third Edition: April 2023
Production reference: 1290323
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham
B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-80461-506-5
www.packtpub.com

--- Page 4 ---
We primarily want to express our gratitude to our families for their
unwavering support, which helped us stay on track and complete this
project.

--- Page 5 ---
We are deeply thankful for the time and eﬀort the Yocto Project and the
OpenEmbedded communities have invested in developing these powerful
open source tools. It is an honor to be part of such a dynamic and
supportive community, and we look forward to continuing our collaboration
and contributing to the growth of these projects. In addition, their vibrant
communities have provided us with insights, reviews, materials, and
guidance, which have been instrumental in shaping the content of this
book.

--- Page 6 ---
– Otavio Salvador and Daiane Angolini
Contributors
About the authors
Otavio Salvador is a well-known software engineer and developer with
extensive embedded Linux development experience. He contributes to open
source projects related to the Linux kernel and embedded systems, including
system boot, device drivers, firmware, and more.
He is the chief executive officer at the Brazilian technology company O.S.
Systems, a leading provider of embedded Linux development solutions and
services. The company offers various services, including embedded Linux
development, consulting, and support. Otavio Salvador has been a key
contributor to the Yocto Project. His expertise in this area has helped make
O.S. Systems a leading Yocto Project-based solutions and services provider.
Daiane Angolini is a software engineer with embedded systems and
embedded Linux development expertise. In addition, she has experience in
open source software development with contributions to several projects and
communities, including the Yocto Project, OpenEmbedded, and the Linux
kernel.
Daiane is a senior embedded software engineer at Foundries.io, a company that
built a secure, open source platform for the world’s connected devices and a
cloud service configurable to any hardware and any cloud through embedded
computing solutions. At Foundries.io, she develops and improves the software
for various embedded systems, maintaining LmP and BPSs based on the ARM
and x86 architectures using Yocto Project tools.
About the reviewers
Vanessa Maegima is an electronics engineer from Brazil with over six years of
experience in embedded systems. She works as an embedded software
engineer focusing on Customer Success at Foundries.io and previously worked
as a systems engineer at NXP Semiconductors, where she met and fell in love

--- Page 7 ---
with the embedded Linux world. She is enthusiastic about U-Boot and Linux
kernel as well as microcontroller unit software development.

--- Page 8 ---
To my family, who always pushes me to be my best, specially to my husband
Gustavo, for the daily support and love.
Khem Raj is a long-time open-source software maintainer and developer. He
serves on the technical steering committee and is part of the advisory board for
Yocto Project. He maintains several Yocto Project layers, including the core
toolchain layer. A fellow at Comcast, Khem has helped bootstrap Reference
Design Kit (RDK) project, which uses Yocto Project for its build infrastructure,
which is now the standard operating platform for set-top boxes and home
routers across the service provider industry. He is also a frequent speaker at
events such as Embedded Linux Conference and Open Source Summit.

--- Page 9 ---
To my children Himangi and Vihaan, who keep me motivated to do new
things, and my spouse Sweta’s everlasting support, without which I would
be unable to do this. Thank you.
Caio Pereira had his first contact with embedded Linux in 2005 during a demo
from Blackfin Digital Signal Processor with μClinux at university. This led him
to decide to work with embedded Linux. He received a bachelor’s of science in
electrical engineering with a specialization in telecommunications from
INATEL, Brazil, in 2008. Over the last 15 years, he has participated in product
development and Linux customization for different areas including
broadcasting, telecommunications, home automation, smart cities, defense, and
lithography machines, having experience with Field Programmable Gate Arrays
and processors from different architectures. Today, he lives in the Netherlands
and works for Foundries.io as a customer success engineer, helping companies
worldwide to develop fast and secure products based on Linux.

--- Page 10 ---
I want to thank my family for their love and support and for understanding
my extra night hours dedicated to study and work. I also thank all my
colleagues from the companies I’ve worked for sharing their knowledge and
experience with me; it has been fundamental to my growth. Special thanks
to all those who dedicate their time to open source projects responsible for
keeping the world running.

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Preface
1
Meeting the Yocto Project
What is the Yocto Project?
Delineating the Yocto Project
The alliance of the OpenEmbedded project and the
Yocto Project
Understanding Poky
BitBake
OpenEmbedded Core
Metadata
The Yocto Project releases
Summary
2
Baking Our First Poky-Based System
Preparing the build host system
Using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSLv2)
Preparing a Linux-based system
Downloading the Poky source code
Preparing the build environment
Knowing the local.conf file
Building a target image

--- Page 12 ---
Running images in QEMU
Summary
3
Using Toaster to Bake an Image
What is Toaster?
Installing Toaster
Starting Toaster
Building an image for QEMU
Summary
4
Meeting the BitBake Tool
Understanding the BitBake tool
BitBake metadata collections
Metadata types
Summary
5
Grasping the BitBake Tool
Parsing metadata
Dependencies
Preferring and providing recipes
Fetching the source code
Remote file downloads
Git repositories

--- Page 13 ---
Optimizing the source code download
Disabling network access
Understanding BitBake’s tasks
Summary
6
Detailing the Temporary Build Directory
Detailing the build directory
Constructing the build directory
Exploring the temporary build directory
Understanding the work directory
Understanding the sysroot directories
Summary
7
Assimilating Packaging Support
Using supported package formats
List of supported package formats
Choosing a package format
Running code during package installation
Understanding shared state cache
Explaining package versioning
Specifying runtime package dependencies
Using packages to generate a rootfs image
Package feeds
Using package feeds
Summary

--- Page 14 ---
8
Diving into BitBake Metadata
Understanding BitBake’s metadata
Working with metadata
Summary
9
Developing with the Yocto Project
What is a software development kit?
Generating a native SDK for on-device development
Understanding the types of cross-development SDKs
Using the Standard SDK
Using the Extensible SDK
Building an image using devtool
Running an image on QEMU
Creating a recipe from an external Git repository
Building a recipe using devtool
Deploying to the target using devtool
Extending the SDK
Summary
10
Debugging with the Yocto Project
Differentiating metadata and application debugging
Tracking image, package, and SDK contents
Debugging packaging

--- Page 15 ---
Inspecting packages
Logging information during task execution
Debugging metadata variables
Utilizing a development shell
Using the GNU Debugger for debugging
Summary
11
Exploring External Layers
Powering flexibility with layers
Detailing a layer’s source code
Adding meta layers
The Yocto Project layer ecosystem
Summary
12
Creating Custom Layers
Making a new layer
Adding metadata to the layer
Creating an image
Adding a package recipe
Adding support to a new machine definition
Using a custom distribution
MACHINE_FEATURES versus DISTRO_FEATURES
Understanding the scope of a variable
Summary

--- Page 16 ---
13
Customizing Existing Recipes
Understanding common use cases
Extending a task
Adding extra options to recipes based on Autotools
Applying a patch
Adding extra files to the existing packages
Understanding file searching paths
Changing recipe feature configuration
Configuration fragments for Kconfig-based projects
Summary
14
Achieving GPL Compliance
Understanding copyleft
Understanding copyleft compliance versus proprietary
code
Managing software licensing with Poky
Understanding commercial licenses
Using Poky to achieve copyleft compliance
Understanding license auditing
Providing the source code
Providing compilation scripts and source code
modifications
Providing license text
Summary

--- Page 17 ---
15
Booting Our Custom Embedded Linux
Discovering the right BSP layer
Reviewing aspects that impact hardware use
Taking a look at widely used BSP layers
Using physical hardware
BeagleBone Black
Baking for BeagleBone Black
Booting BeagleBone Black
Raspberry Pi 4
Baking for Raspberry Pi 4
Booting Raspberry Pi 4
VisionFive
Baking for VisionFive
Booting VisionFive
Taking the next steps
Summary
16
Speeding Up Product Development through
Emulation – QEMU
What is QEMU?
What are the benefits of using QEMU over hardware?
When is choosing real hardware preferable?
Using runqemu capabilities
Using runqemu to test graphical applications
Using runqemu to validate memory constraints

--- Page 18 ---
Using runqemu to help with image regression tests
Summary
17
Best Practices
Guidelines to follow for Yocto Project
Managing layers
Avoid creating too many layers
Prepare the product metadata for new Yocto Project
releases
Create your custom distro
Avoid reusing existing images for your product
Standard SDK is commonly undervalued
Avoid too many patches for Linux kernel and
bootloader modifications
Avoid using AUTOREV as SRCREV
Create a Software Bill of Materials
Guidelines to follow for general projects
Continuously monitor the project license constraints
Security can harm your project
Don’t underestimate maintenance costs
Tackle project risk points and constraints as soon as
possible
Summary
Index
Other Books You May Enjoy

--- Page 19 ---
Preface
Linux has been consistently used in cutting-edge products, and embedded
systems have been wrought in the technological portfolio of humankind.
The Yocto Project is in an optimal position to be the choice for your projects. It
provides a rich set of tools to help you use most of your energy and resources in
your product development instead of reinventing the wheel.
The usual tasks and requirements of embedded Linux-based products and
development teams were the guideline for this book’s conception. However,
being written by active community members with a practical and
straightforward approach is a stepping stone for both your learning curve and
the product’s project.
In this third edition, the book has been thoroughly reworked to incorporate the
feedback from readers from previous editions and extended to facilitate the
understanding of complex concepts related to the Yocto Project, in addition to
being fully updated to reflect the changes made up to Yocto Project Long Term
Support version 4.0 (codename Kirkstone).
Furthermore, two new chapters have been added, one regarding using QEMU
to speed product development through emulation and one about Yocto Project
and general project guidelines.

--- Page 20 ---
Who this book is for
This book is intended for engineers and enthusiasts with embedded Linux
experience, willing to learn about Yocto Project’s tools for evaluation,
comparison, or use in a project. This book is aimed at helping you get up to
speed quickly and to prevent you from getting trapped into the usual learning
curve pitfalls.

--- Page 21 ---
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Meeting the Yocto Project, presents the first concepts and premises
to introduce parts of the Yocto Project and its main tools.
Chapter 2, Baking Our Poky-Based System, introduces the environment needed
for the first build.
Chapter 3, Using Toaster to Bake an Image, shows the user-friendly web
interface that can be used as a configuration wrapper and build tool.
Chapter 4, Meeting the BitBake Tool, presents the BitBake metadata concepts.
Chapter 5, Grasping the BitBake Tool, shows how it manages the tasks and
their dependencies.
Chapter 6, Detailing the Temporary Build Directory, details the temporary
output folder of a build.
Chapter 7, Assimilating Packaging Support, explains the packaging mechanism
used as a base to create and manage all the binary packages.
Chapter 8, Diving into BitBake Metadata, details the BitBake metadata
language, which will be used for all the other chapters.
Chapter 9, Developing with the Yocto Project, demonstrates the workflow
needed to obtain a development environment.
Chapter 10, Debugging with the Yocto Project, shows how to use Poky to
generate a debug environment and how to use it.
Chapter 11, Exploring External Layers, explores one of the most important
concepts of the Yocto Project—the flexibility of using external layers.
Chapter 12, Creating Custom Layers, practices the steps for layer creation.
Chapter 13, Customizing Existing Recipes, presents examples of how to
customize existing recipes.
Chapter 14, Achieving GPL Compliance, summarizes the tasks and concepts
involved for a copyleft compliance product.
Chapter 15, Booting Our Custom Embedded Linux, uses real hardware
machines and the Yocto Project’s tools.

--- Page 22 ---
Chapter 16, Speeding Up Product Development Through Emulation – QEMU,
illustrates how QEMU can accelerate product development.
Chapter 17, Best Practices, discusses some Yocto Project and general project-
related guidelines based on the author’s experience.
To get the most out of this book
To understand this book better, it is crucial that you have some previous
background about some of the topics that are not covered or are just briefly
mentioned in the text, such as Git and general knowledge of Linux kernel and
its basic compilation process.
To understand the big picture of the Yocto Project before going to the technical
concepts detailed in this book, we recommend the open sourced booklet,
Heading for the Yocto Project, found in the Git repository at
https://git.io/vFUiI; the content of this booklet is intended to help newcomers
to gain a better understanding of the goals of the Yocto Project and its potential
uses. It provides an overview of the project before diving into the technical
details of how things can be done.
A basic understanding of the use of the GNU/Linux environment and embedded
Linux is required, as well as the general concepts used in development, such as
compilation, debugging, deployment, and installation. In addition, some
experience with shell script and Python is a bonus because these programming
languages are core technologies used extensively by the Yocto Project’s tools.
However, you may prefer to learn more about those topics. In that case, we
recommend the book Mastering Embedded Linux Programming - Third Edition,
ISBN-13 978-1789530384, by Chris Simmonds.
You shouldn’t take any missing concepts – of those we enumerated above – as a
deterrent but as something you can learn and, at the same time, practice their
use with this book.
Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and
diagrams used in this book. You can download it here:
https://packt.link/lbpMD.

--- Page 23 ---
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names,
filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter
handles. Here is an example: “In line 8, BBFILE_COLLECTIONS, we tell BitBake to
create a new metadata collection called yocto. Next, in line 9, BBFILE_PATTERN_yocto,
we define the rule to match all paths starting with LAYERDIR to identify the
metadata belonging to the yocto collection.”
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
 
$ sudo dnf install gawk make wget tar bzip2 gzip python3 unzip perl patch diffutils  
diffstat git cpp gcc gcc-c++ glibc-devel texinfo chrpath ccache perl-Data-Dumper perl-
Text-ParseWords perl-Thread-Queue perl-bignum socat python3-pexpect findutils which file  
cpio python python3-pip xz python3-GitPython python3-jinja2 SDL-devel xterm rpcgen mesa-
libGL-devel perl-FindBin perl-File-Compare perl-File-Copy perl-locale zstd lz4
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see
onscreen. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is
an example: “After that, click the Image recipes tab to choose the image you
want to build.”
TIPS OR IMPORTANT NOTES
Appear like this.
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email
us at customercare@packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of
your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we
would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit
www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address
or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link to the
material.

--- Page 24 ---
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you
have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a
book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.
Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read Embedded Linux Development Using Yocto Project, we’d love
to hear your thoughts! Please click here to go straight to the Amazon review
page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make
sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.
Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere? Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your
choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of
that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from
your favorite technical books directly into your application. 
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below

--- Page 25 ---
https://packt.link/fr ee-ebook/9781804615065
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

--- Page 26 ---
1
Meeting the Yocto Project
This chapter introduces you to the Yocto Project. The main concepts of the
project discussed here are constantly used throughout the book. In addition, we
will briefly discuss the history of the Yocto Project, OpenEmbedded, Poky,
BitBake, metadata, and versioning schema. So, fasten your seat belt, and
welcome aboard!
What is the Yocto Project?
The Yocto Project is a Linux Foundation workgroup and is defined as follows:

--- Page 27 ---
The Yocto Project is an open source collaboration project that helps
developers create custom Linux-based systems that are designed for
embedded products regardless of the product’s hardware architecture.
Yocto Project provides a ﬂexible toolset and a development environment
that allows embedded device developers across the world to collaborate
through shared technologies, software stacks, conﬁgurations, and best
practices used to create these tailored Linux images.

--- Page 28 ---
Thousands of developers worldwide have discovered that Yocto Project
provides advantages in both systems and applications development,
archival and management beneﬁts, and customizations used for speed,
footprint, and memory utilization. The project is a standard when it comes
to delivering embedded software stacks. The project allows software
customizations and build interchange for multiple hardware platforms as
well as software stacks that can be maintained and scaled.

--- Page 29 ---
- Yocto Project Overview and Concepts Manual
The Yocto Project is an open source collaboration project. It supplies templates,
tools, and methods to help us create custom Linux-based systems for embedded
products, regardless of the hardware architecture. It can generate tailored
Linux distributions based on the glibc and musl C standard libraries and the
Real-Time Operating System (RTOS) toolchains for bare-metal development,
as done by the Zephyr Project.
Being managed by a Linux Foundation member, the project stays independent
of the member organizations, which participate in many ways and supply
resources to the project.
It was founded in 2010 as a collaboration of many hardware manufacturers,
open source operating systems, vendors, and electronics companies to reduce
duplication of work and supply resources and information catering to new and
experienced users. Among these resources is OpenEmbedded Core, the core
system component provided by the OpenEmbedded project.
The Yocto Project aggregates several companies, communities, projects, and
tools with the same purpose – to build Linux-based embedded products. These
stakeholders are in the same boat, driven by their community needs to work
together.
Delineating the Yocto Project
To ease our understanding of the duties and outcomes of the Yocto Project, we
can use the analogy of a computing machine. The input is a set of data that
describes what we want, that is, our specification. As an output, we have the
desired Linux-based embedded product.
The output is composed of the pieces of the operating system. It encompasses
the Linux kernel, bootloader, and the root filesystem (rootfs) bundled and
organized to work together.
The Yocto Project’s tools are present in all intermediary steps to produce the
resultant rootfs bundle and other deliverables. The previously built software
components are reused across builds – applications, libraries, or any software
component.

--- Page 30 ---
When reuse is not possible, the software components are built in the correct
order and with the desired configuration, including fetching the required
source code from their respective repositories, such as The Linux Kernel
Archives (www.kernel.org), GitHub, BitBucket, and GitLab.
The Yocto Project’s tools prepare its build environment, utilities, and
toolchains, reducing the host software dependency. The utilities, versions, and
configuration options are independent of the host Linux distribution,
minimizing the number of host utilities to rely on while producing the same
result. A subtle but essential implication benefit is the considerable increase in
determinism, reduced build host dependencies, but increased first-time builds.
BitBake and OpenEmbedded Core are under the OpenEmbedded project
umbrella, while some projects, such as Poky, are under the Yocto Project
umbrella. They are all complementary and play specific roles in the system. We
will understand exactly how they work together in this chapter and throughout
this book.
The alliance of the OpenEmbedded project and
the Yocto Project
The OpenEmbedded project was created around January 2003 when some core
developers from the OpenZaurus project started to work with the new build
system. Since its beginning, the OpenEmbedded build system has been a task
scheduler inspired and based on the Gentoo Portage package system named
BitBake. As a result, the project quickly grew its software collection and the
supported machine list.
Due to chaotic and uncoordinated development, it was challenging to use
OpenEmbedded in products that demand a more stable and polished code base,
which is how Poky distribution was born. Poky started as a subset of the
OpenEmbedded build system, and had a more polished and stable code base
across a limited set of architectures. Additionally, its reduced size allowed Poky
to develop highlighting technologies, such as IDE plugins and Quick Emulator
(QEMU) integration, which are still in use.
The Yocto Project and OpenEmbedded project consolidated their efforts on a
core build system called OpenEmbedded Core. It uses the best of both Poky and
OpenEmbedded, emphasizing the increased use of additional components,

--- Page 31 ---
metadata, and subsets. Around November 2010, the Linux Foundation
announced that the Yocto Project would continue this work under a Linux
Foundation-sponsored project.
Understanding Poky
Poky is the default Yocto Project reference distribution, which uses
OpenEmbedded build system technology. It is composed of a collection of tools,
configuration files, and recipe data (known as metadata). It is platform-
independent and performs cross-compiling using the BitBake tool,
OpenEmbedded Core, and a default set of metadata, as shown in the following
figure. In addition, it provides the mechanism to build and combine thousands
of distributed open source projects to form a fully customizable, complete, and
coherent Linux software stack.
Poky’s main objective is to provide all the features an embedded developer
needs.
Figure 1.1 – P oky main components
BitBake
BitBake is a task scheduler and execution system that parses Python and Shell
Script code. The code that is parsed generates and runs tasks, which are a set
of steps ordered per the code’s dependencies.
BitBake evaluates all available metadata, managing dynamic variable
expansion, dependencies, and code generation. In addition, it keeps track of all
tasks to ensure their completion, maximizing the use of processing resources to
reduce build time and predictability. The development of BitBake happens in

--- Page 32 ---
the https://lists.openembedded.org/g/bitbake-devel mailing list, and the source
code is in the bitbake subdirectory of Poky.
OpenEmbedded Core
The OpenEmbedded Core metadata collection provides the engine of the Poky
build system. It provides the core features and aims to be generic and as lean
as possible. It supports seven different processor architectures (ARM, ARM64,
x86, x86-64, PowerPC, PowerPC 64, MIPS, MIPS64, RISC-V32, and RISC-V 64),
only supporting platforms to be emulated by QEMU.
The development is centralized in the
https://lists.openembedded.org/g/openembedded-core (mailto:openembedded-
core@lists.openembedded.org) mailing list and houses its metadata inside the
meta subdirectory of Poky.
Metadata
The metadata includes recipes and configuration files. It is composed of a mix
of Python and Shell Script text files, providing a tremendously flexible tool.
Poky uses this to extend OpenEmbedded Core and includes two different
layers, which are other metadata subsets, shown as follows:
meta-poky : This layer provides the default and supported distribution policies, visual branding, and
metadata tracking information (maintainers, upstream status, and so on). This is to serve as a curated
template that could be used by distribution builders to seed their custom distribution.
meta-yocto-bsp : This provides the Board Support P ackage  (BSP) used as the reference hardware
for the Yocto Project development and Quality Assurance  (QA) process.
Chapter 9, Developing with Yocto Project, explores the metadata in more detail
and serves as a reference when we write our recipes.
The Yocto Project releases
The Yocto Project has a release every six months, in April and October. This
release cycle ensures continuous development flow while providing points of
increased testing and focus on stability. A release becomes a Stable or a Long-
Term Support (LTS) release whenever a release is ready.

--- Page 33 ---
The support period differs significantly between the stable and LTS releases.
The support for the stable release is for 7 months, offering 1 month of
overlapped support for every stable release. The LTS release has a minimal
support period of 2 years, optionally extended. After the official support period
ends, it moves to Community support and finally reaches End Of Life (EOL).
When the official release support period ends, a release can be Community
support if a community member steps in to become the community maintainer.
Finally, a release turns EOL when there is no change in the source code by 2
months, or the community maintainer is no longer an active member.
The following diagram shows the two release cycles:
Figure 1.2 – Stable or L TS release cycles
Table 1.1 provides the Yocto Project version, codename, release date, and
current support level, which can be seen as follows. The updated table is
available at https://wiki.yoctoproject.org/wiki/Releases:
CodenameVersionRelease Date Support Level
Mickledore 4.2 April 2023 Future (until October 2023)
Langdale 4.1 October 2022 Stable (until May 2023)
Kirkstone 4.0 May 2022 LTS (minimum April 2024)
Honister 3.4 October 2021 EOL
Hardknott 3.3 April 2021 EOL
Gatesgarth 3.2 Oct 2020 EOL
Dunfell 3.1 April 2020 LTS (until April 2024)
Zeus 3.0 October 2019 EOL

--- Page 34 ---
CodenameVersionRelease Date Support Level
Warrior 2.7 April 2019 EOL
Thud 2.6 Nov 2018 EOL
Sumo 2.5 April 2018 EOL
Rocko 2.4 Oct 2017 EOL
Pyro 2.3 May 2017 EOL
Morty 2.2 Nov 2016 EOL
Krogoth 2.1 Apr 2016 EOL
Jethro 2.0 Nov 2015 EOL
Fido 1.8 Apr 2015 EOL
Dizzy 1.7 Oct 2014 EOL
Daisy 1.6 Apr 2014 EOL
Dora 1.5 Oct 2013 EOL
Dylan 1.4 Apr 2013 EOL
Danny 1.3 Oct 2012 EOL
Denzil 1.2 Apr 2012 EOL
Edison 1.1 Oct 2011 EOL
Bernard 1.0 Apr 2011 EOL
Laverne 0.9 Oct 2010 EOL
Table 1.1 – List of Y octo P roject versions

--- Page 35 ---
Summary
This chapter provided an overview of how the OpenEmbedded project is related
to the Yocto Project, the components that form Poky, and how the project
began. The next chapter will introduce the Poky workflow with steps to
download, configure, and prepare the Poky build environment and how to have
the first image built and running using QEMU.

--- Page 36 ---
2
Baking Our First Poky-Based System
Let’s get our hands dirty! In this chapter, we will understand the basic
concepts involved in the Poky workflow. We will cover the steps to download,
configure, and prepare the Poky build environment and bake something usable.
The steps covered here are common for testing and development. They will give
us some experience using Poky and a taste of its capabilities.
Preparing the build host system
This section describes how to prepare Windows and Linux distribution host
systems. Although we will describe the Windows steps, we will focus on using a
Linux distribution host system.
TIP
The use of macOS as a host system is possible. Still, it involves using the CROss PlatformS  (CROPS )
framework, which leverages Docker , allowing the use of foreign operating systems, including macOS. For
more information, you can refer to the Setting Up to Use CROss PlatformS (CROPS)  section from the Yocto
Project Development T asks Manual  (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/start.html#setting-up-
to-use-cross-platforms-crops ).
Next, we will provide the necessary information to start the build host system
preparation.
Using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSLv2)
You can set up a Linux distribution on Windows if you are a Windows user.
WSLv2 is only available for Windows 10+ builds greater than 18917. WSLv2
allows development using the Yocto Project. You can install the Linux
distribution from the Microsoft Store.
Please refer to the Setting Up to Use Windows Subsystem For Linux session
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/start.html#setting-up-to-use-
windows-subsystem-for-linux-wslv2) from the Yocto Project Development Tasks
Manual (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/index.html). Once you

--- Page 37 ---
have WSLv2 set up, you can follow the next sections as if you were running on
a native Linux machine.
Preparing a Linux-based system
The process needed to set up our host system depends on the Linux distribution
we use. Poky has a set of supported Linux distributions. Let’s suppose we are
new to embedded Linux development. In that case, it is advisable to use one of
the supported Linux distributions to avoid wasting time debugging issues
related to the host system support.
If you use the current release of one of the following distributions, you should
be good to start using the Yocto Project on your machine:
Ubuntu
Fedora
CentOS
AlmaLinux
Debian
OpenSUSE Leap
To confirm whether your version is supported, it is advisable to check the
official documentation online in the Required Packages for the Build Host
section (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/system-
requirements.html#required-packages-for-the-build-host).
If your preferred distribution is not in the preceding list, it doesn’t mean it is
not possible to use Poky on it. Your host development system must meet some
specific versions for Git, tar, Python, and GCC. Your Linux distributions should
provide compatible versions of those base tools. However, there is a chance
that your host development system does not meet all these requirements. In
that case, you can resolve this by installing a b u i l d t o o l s tarball that contains
these tools, as detailed in Required Git, tar, Python, and GCC Versions
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/system-
requirements.html#required-git-tar-python-and-gcc-versions).
We must install a few packages on the host system. This book provides
instructions for D e b i a n and F e d o r a, our preferred distributions, which we will
look at next. The set of packages for other supported distributions can be found

--- Page 38 ---
in the Yocto Project Reference Manual (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-
manual/system-requirements.html#required-packages-for-the-build-host).
Debian-based distribution
To install the necessary packages for a headless host system, run the following
command:
 
$ sudo apt install gawk wget git diffstat unzip texinfo gcc build-essential chrpath socat  
cpio python3 python3-pip python3-pexpect xz-utils debianutils iputils-ping python3-git  
python3-jinja2 libegl1-mesa libsdl1.2-dev pylint3 xterm python3-subunit mesa-common-dev  
zstd liblz4-tool
Fedora
To install the needed packages for a headless host system, run the following
command:
 
$ sudo dnf install gawk make wget tar bzip2 gzip python3 unzip perl patch diffutils  
diffstat git cpp gcc gcc-c++ glibc-devel texinfo chrpath ccache perl-Data-Dumper perl-
Text-ParseWords perl-Thread-Queue perl-bignum socat python3-pexpect findutils which file  
cpio python python3-pip xz python3-GitPython python3-jinja2 SDL-devel xterm rpcgen mesa-
libGL-devel perl-FindBin perl-File-Compare perl-File-Copy perl-locale  zstd lz4
Downloading the Poky source code
After we have installed the required packages on our development host system,
we can download the current LTS version (at the time of writing) of Poky
source code using Git, with the following command:
$ git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/poky -b kirkstone
TIP
Learn more about Git at https://git-scm.com .
After the download process is complete, we should have the following contents
inside the poky directory:

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 2.1 – The content of the pok y directory af ter downloading
NOTE
The examples and code presented in this and subsequent chapters use the Y octo Project 4.0 release
(codenamed Kirkstone ) as a reference.
Preparing the build environment
Inside the poky directory exists a script named oe-init-build-env, which sets up
the building environment. But first, the script must be run-sourced (not
executed) as follows:
 
$ source oe-init-build-env [build-directory]
Here, [build-directory] is an optional parameter for the name of the directory
where the environment is configured. If it is empty, it defaults to build. The
[build-directory] parameter is the place where we perform the builds.
The output from source oe-init-build-env build displays some important
configurations such as the file location, some project URLs, and some common
targets, such as available images. The following figure shows an output
example:

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 2.2 – Output of the sour ce oe-init-build-env build command
It is very convenient to use different build directories. We can work on separate
projects in parallel or experimental setups without affecting our other builds.
NOTE
Throughout the book, we will use build  as the build directory . When we need to point to a ﬁle inside the
build directory , we will adopt the same convention – for example, build/conf /local.conf .
Knowing the local.conf file
When we initialize a build environment, it creates a file called
build/conf/local.conf. This config file is powerful, since it can configure almost

--- Page 41 ---
every aspect of the build process. We can set the target machine and the
toolchain host architecture to be used for a custom cross-toolchain, optimize
options for maximum build time reduction, and so on. The comments inside the
build/conf/local.conf file are excellent documentation and a reference of the
possible variables and their defaults. The minimal set of variables that we
probably want to change from the default is the following:
 
MACHINE ??= "qemux86-64"
The MACHINE variable is where we determine the target machine we wish to build.
At the time of writing, Poky supports the following machines in its reference
BSP:
beaglebone-yocto : This is BeagleBone, which is the reference platform for 32-bit ARM
genericx86 : This is generic support for 32-bit x86-based machines
genericx86-64:  This is generic support for 64-bit x86-based machines
edgerouter : This is EdgeRouter Lite, which is the reference platform for 64-bit MIPS
The machines are made available by a layer called meta-yocto-bsp. Besides these
machines, OpenEmbedded Core, inside the meta directory, also provides support
for the following Quick Emulation (QEMU) machines:
qemuarm : This is the QEMU ARMv7 emulation
qemuarmv5 : This is the QEMU ARMv5 emulation
qemuarm64 : This is the QEMU ARMv8 emulation
qemumips : This is the QEMU MIPS emulation
qemumips64 : This is the QEMU MIPS64 emulation
qemuppc : This is the QEMU PowerPC emulation
qemuppc64 : This is the QEMU PowerPC 64 emulation
qemux86-64 : This is the QEMU x86-64 emulation
qemux86 : This is the QEMU x86 emulation
qemuriscv32 : This is the QEMU RISC-V 32 emulation
qemuriscv64 : This is the QEMU RISC-V 64 emulation
Extra BSP layers available from several vendors provide support for other
machines. The process of using an extra BSP layer is shown in Chapter 11,
Exploring External Layers.
NOTE

--- Page 42 ---
The local.conf  ﬁle is a convenient way to override several global default conﬁgurations throughout the
Yocto Project’s tools. Essentially , we can change or set any variable – for example, adding additional
packages to an image ﬁle. Changing the build/conf/local.conf  ﬁle is convenient; however , the source
code management system usually does not track temporary changes in this directory .
The build/conf/local.conf file can set several variables. It is worth taking some
time and reading through the file comments that are generated to get a general
idea of what variables can be set.
Building a target image
Poky provides several predesigned image recipes we can use to build our
binary image. We can check the list of available images by running the
following command from the poky directory:
 
$ ls meta*/recipes*/*images/*.bb
All the recipes provide images that are a set of unpacked and configured
packages, generating a filesystem that we can use with hardware or one of the
supported QEMU machines.
Next, we can see the list of most commonly used images:
core-image-minimal : This is a small image allowing a device to boot. It is handy for kernel and
bootloader tests and development.
core-image-base : This console-only image provides basic hardware support for the target device.
core-image-weston : This image provides the Wayland protocol libraries and the reference Weston
compositor.
core-image-x11 : This is a basic X11 image with a terminal.
core-image-sato : This is an image with Sato support and a mobile environment for mobile devices
that use X11. It provides applications such as a terminal, editor, file manager, media player, and so
on.
core-image-full-cmdline : A console-only image with more full-featured Linux system functionality
installed.
There are other reference images available from the community. Several
images support features, such as Real Time, initramfs, and MTD (flash tools). It
is good to check the source code or the Yocto Project Reference Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/index.html) for the complete
and updated list.
The process of building an image for a target is straightforward. But first, we
need to set up the build environment using source oe-init-build-env [build-

--- Page 43 ---
directory] before using BitBake. To build the image, we can use the template in
the following command:
Figure 2.3 – How to build a r ecipe using BitBak e
NOTE
We will use MACHINE = "qemux86-64"  in the following examples. You can set it in build/conf/local.conf
accordingly .
For example, to build core-image-full-cmdline, run the following command:
 
$ bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
The Poky build looks like the following figure:
Figure 2.4 – The r esult of bitbak e cor e-ima ge-full-cmdline
Running images in QEMU
We can use hardware emulation to speed up the development process, as it
enables a test run without involving any actual hardware. Fortunately, most
projects have only a tiny portion that is hardware-dependent.

--- Page 44 ---
QEMU is a free, open source software package that performs hardware
virtualization. QEMU-based machines allow testing and development without
real hardware. ARMv5, ARMv7, ARMv8, MIPS, MIPS64, PowerPC, PowerPC 64,
RISC-V 32, RISC-V 64, x86, and x86-64 emulations are currently supported. We
will go into more detail about QEMU usage in sw, Speeding Up Product
Development through Emulation – QEMU.
OpenEmbedded Core provides the runqemu script tool, which is a wrapper to
make use of QEMU easier. The way to run the script tool is as follows:
 
$ runqemu <machine> <zimage> <filesystem>
Here, <machine> is the machine/architecture to be used as qemux86-64, or any other
supported machine. Also, <zimage> is the path to a kernel (for example, bzImage-
qemux86-64.bin). Finally, <filesystem> is the path to an ext4 image (for example,
filesystem-qemux86-64.ext4) or an NFS directory. All parameters in the preceding
call to runqemu <zimage> and <filesystem> are optional. Just running runqemu is
sufficient to launch the image in the shell where the build environment is set,
as it will automatically pick up the default settings from building the
environment.
So, for example, if we run runqemu qemux86-64 core-image-full-cmdline, we can see
something similar to that shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 2.5 – The QEMU scr een during the Linux k ernel boot
After finishing booting Linux, you will see a login prompt, as shown in Figure
2.6:
Figure 2.6 – The QEMU scr een during user login

--- Page 46 ---
We can log in to the root account using an empty password. The system behaves
as a regular machine, even when executed inside the QEMU. The process to
deploy an image in real hardware varies, depending on the type of storage
used, the bootloader, and so on. However, the process of generating the image
is the same. We explore how to build and run an image in real hardware in
Chapter 15, Booting Our Custom Embedded Linux.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned the steps needed to set up Poky and get our first
image built. Then, we ran that image using runqemu, which gave us a good
overview of the available capabilities. In the next chapter, we will introduce
Toaster, a human-friendly interface for BitBake. We will use it to build an image
and customize it further.

--- Page 47 ---
3
Using Toaster to Bake an Image
Now that we know how to build an image using BitBake within Poky, we will
learn how to do the same using Toaster. We are going to focus on the most
straightforward usage of Toaster and also cover what else it can do so that you
know about its capabilities.
What is Toaster?
Toaster is a web interface to configure and run builds. It communicates with
the BitBake and Poky build system to manage and gather information about the
builds, packages, and images.
There are two ways to use Toaster:
Locally : We can run Toaster as a local instance, suitable for single-user development, providing a
graphical interface to the BitBake command lines and some build information.
Hosted : This is suitable for multiple users. The Toaster servers build and store the users’ artifacts. Its
components can be spread across several machines when using a hosted instance.
In this chapter, we will use Toaster as a local instance. However, if you want to
use it as a hosted instance, please visit the following website for instructions –
Toaster Manual (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/toaster-
manual/index.html).
NOTE
Bear in mind that every hosted service requires attention to its security . Think about this before using a
hosted instanc e.
Installing Toaster
Toaster uses the Python Django framework. The easiest way to install it is by
using Python’s pip utility. We already installed this when configuring our host
machine in Chapter 2, Baking Our Poky-Based System. We can now install the
rest of Toaster’s requirements inside the Poky source directory by running the
following command:

--- Page 48 ---
 
$ pip3 install --user -r bitbake/toaster-requirements. txt
Starting Toaster
Once we have installed Toaster’s requirements, we are ready to start its server.
To do this, we should go to Poky’s directory and run the following commands:
 
$ source oe-init-build-env  
$ source toaster start
The commands take some time to finish. When everything is set up, the web
server is started. The result is shown in the following figure.

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 3.1 – The r esult of the sour ce toaster startup
To access the Toaster web interface, open your favorite browser and enter the
following:
http://127.0.0.1:8000
NOTE
By default, T oaster starts on port 8000 . The webport  parameter lets you use a diﬀerent port – for example,
$ source toaster start webport=8400 .
Next, we can see the starting page of Toaster:

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 3.2 – The T oaster welcome p age
Building an image for QEMU
Following the same steps used in Chapter 2, Baking Our Poky-Based System,
we will build an image of the QEMU x86-64 emulation.
Since we currently don’t have a project, a collection of configurations and
builds, we need to start one. Create a project name and choose the target
release, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 51 ---
Figure 3.3 – Cr eating a new pr oject with T oaster
After creating my-ﬁrst-project, we can see the main project screen, as shown
in the following screenshot:

--- Page 52 ---
Figure 3.4 – The ﬁrst page of the pr oject
While on the Conﬁguration tab, go to Machine and change the target
machine to qemux86-64:

--- Page 53 ---
Figure 3.5 – How to choose the tar get machine
After that, click the Image recipes tab to choose the image you want to build.
In this example, as used in Chapter 2, Baking Our Poky-Based System, we can
build core-image-full-cmdline:

--- Page 54 ---
Figure 3.6 – How to ﬁnd an image using Sear ch
The following screenshot shows the build process:
Figure 3.7 – T oaster during the image build
The build process takes some time, but after that, we can see the built image
along with some statistics, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 55 ---
Figure 3.8 – The image build artifact r eport
We can also verify the generated set of files, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 56 ---
Figure 3.9 – The cor e-image-full-cmdline dir ectory structur e as shown in T oaster
Toaster is a powerful tool. You can use it on a local development machine or a
shared server to get a graphic representation of the build. You can return to
the terminal where you started Toaster to run runqemu qemux86-64 core-image-full-
cmdline. You will see what is shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 57 ---
Figure 3.10 – The QEMU scr een during the Linux k ernel boot
After finishing the Linux booting, you will see a login prompt, as shown in
Figure 3.11.


--- Page 58 ---
Figure 3.11 – The QEMU scr een during user login
We can log in to the root account using an empty password.
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced Toaster and its essential features. Then, we went
through installing and configuring Toaster and built and inspected an image.
In the next chapter, we will go through some critical BitBake concepts. We
believe these concepts are essential to understanding the Yocto Project. We will
use BitBake and the command line for the rest of the book, as they provide a
view of all the concepts.

--- Page 59 ---
4
Meeting the BitBake Tool
With this chapter, we will now begin our journey of learning how the Yocto
Project’s engine works behind the scenes. As is the case with every journey,
communication is critical, so we need to understand the language used by the
Yocto Project’s tools and learn how to get the best out of these tools to
accomplish our goals.
The preceding chapters introduced us to the standard Yocto Project workflow
for creating and emulating images. Now, in this chapter, we will explore the
concept of metadata and how BitBake reads this metadata to make its internal
data collections.
Understanding the BitBake tool
The BitBake task scheduler started as a fork from Portage, the package
management system used in the Gentoo distribution. However, the two projects
diverged significantly due to different use cases. The Yocto Project and the
OpenEmbedded Project are intensive users of BitBake. It remains a separate
and independent project with its own development cycle and mailing list
(bitbake-devel@lists.openembedded.org).
BitBake is a tool similar to GNU Make. As discussed in Chapter 1, Meeting the
Yocto Project, BitBake is a task executor and scheduler that parses Python and
Shell Script mixed code.
Therefore, BitBake is responsible for running as many tasks as possible in
parallel while ensuring they are run respecting their dependencies.
BitBake metadata collections
For BitBake, there is no metadata outside a metadata collection. Instead, a
metadata collection has a unique name, and the common term the Yocto Project
uses for those collections is Layer.

--- Page 60 ---
Chapter 1, Meeting the Yocto Project, explains that we have the following
layers:
OpenEmbedded Core : This is inside the meta  directory
Poky distribution : This is inside the meta-poky  directory
Yocto Project reference BSP : This is inside the meta-yocto-bsp  directory
The preceding list describes real examples of layers. Every layer contains a file
called conf/layer.conf. This file defines several layer properties, such as the
collection name and priority. The following figure shows the conf/layer.conf file
for the meta-poky layer:
Figure 4.1 – The conf/layer .conf ﬁle for the meta-pok y layer
The preceding example is relatively simple but serves as a base for us to
illustrate the conf/layer.conf file principles.
In line 8, BBFILE_COLLECTIONS, we tell BitBake to create a new metadata collection
called yocto. Next, in line 9, BBFILE_PATTERN_yocto, we define the rule to match all
paths starting with the LAYERDIR variable to identify the metadata belonging to
the yocto collection. Finally, in line 10, BBFILE_PRIORITY_yocto establishes the
priority (the higher the number, the higher the priority) of the yocto collection
against the other metadata collections.
The dependency relation between the layers is vital as it ensures that all
required metadata is available for use. An example is in line 18 as

--- Page 61 ---
LAYERDEPENDS_yocto, from the conf/layer.conf file, adds a dependency to the core,
provided by the OpenEmbedded Core layer.
Figure 4.2 shows Poky’s layers using the bitbake-layers command, as follows:
Figure 4.2 – R esults of bitbak e-layers show-layers for P oky
Metadata types
There are three major areas where we can classify the metadata used by
BitBake. They are as follows:
Configuration (the .conf  files)
Classes (the .bbclass  files)
Recipes (the .bb and .bbappend  files)
The configuration files define the global content to provide information and
configure how the recipes work. One typical example of a configuration file is
the machine file, which has a list of settings that describes the hardware.
The whole system uses the classes that recipes can inherit according to their
needs or by default. They define the commonly used system’s behavior and
provide the base methods. For example, kernel.bbclass abstracts tasks related to
building and packaging the Linux kernel independently of version or vendor
changes.
NOTE
The recipes and classes mix Python and Shell Script code.
The classes and recipes describe the tasks to be run and provide the
information needed to allow BitBake to generate the required task list and its
dependencies. The inheritance mechanism permits a recipe to inherit one or
more classes to promote code reuse, improve accuracy, and make maintenance
easier. A Linux kernel recipe example is linux-yocto_5.15.bb, which inherits a set
of classes, including kernel.bbclass.

--- Page 62 ---
BitBake’s most commonly used aspects across all types of metadata (.conf, .bb,
and .bbclass) are covered in Chapter 5, Grasping the BitBake Tool, while the
metadata grammar and syntax are detailed in Chapter 8, Diving into BitBake
Metadata.
Taking Figure 4.1 into consideration, we need to pay attention to two other
variables – BBPATH and BBFILES.
BBPATH, on line 2, is analogous to PATH but adds a directory to the search list for
metadata files; the BBFILES variable, on line 5, lists the pattern used to index the
collection recipe files.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about metadata, metadata collection concepts, and
the importance of conf/layer.conf, which are the base for the understanding of
the Yocto Project. In the next chapter, we will examine metadata knowledge,
understand how recipes depend on each other, and how BitBake deals with
dependencies. Additionally, we will also get a better view of the tasks managed
by BitBake, download all the required source code, build and generate
packages, and see how these packages fit into generated images.

--- Page 63 ---
5
Grasping the BitBake Tool
In the previous chapter, we learned about metadata, metadata collection
concepts, and the importance of conf/layer.conf. In this chapter, we will examine
metadata more deeply, understand how recipes depend on each other, and see
how BitBake deals with dependencies.
In addition, we will cover a massive list of tasks, from downloading source code
to generating images and other artifacts. Some examples of these tasks are
storing the source code in the directory used for the build, patching,
configuring, compiling, installing, and generating packages, and determining
how the packages fit into the generated images, which we will introduce in this
chapter.
Parsing metadata
Usually, our projects include multiple layers that provide different metadata to
fulfill specific needs. For example, when we initialize a build directory, using
source oe-init-build-env build, a set of files is generated as follows:
Figure 5.1 – A list of ﬁles cr eated with sour ce oe-init-build-env build
The build/conf/templateconf.cfg file points to the directory used as the template to
create the build/conf directory.
NOTE
A user can provide a diﬀerent template directory using the TEMPLATECONF  environment variable – for
example, TEMPLATECONF=/some/dir source oe-init-build-env build .

--- Page 64 ---
The build/conf/local.conf file is the placeholder for the local configurations. We
used this file in Chapter 2, Baking Our First Poky-Based System, and we will
use it throughout this book.
BitBake uses the build/conf/bblayers.conf file to list the layers considered in the
build environment. An example is as follows:
Figure 5.2 – The build/conf/bblayer .conf content af ter the sour ce oe-init-build-env build
The BBLAYERS variable, on line 8, is a space-delimited list of layer directories.
BitBake parses each layer to load its content to the metadata collection. There
are three major categories that the metadata used by BitBake can be classified
into. They are listed as follows:
Configuration (the .conf  files)
Classes (the .bbclass  files)
Recipes (the .bb and .bbappend  files)
TIP
The order of the listed layers in the BBLAYERS  variable is followed from left to right by BitBake when parsing
the metadata. Therefore, if your layer needs to be parsed ﬁrst, have it listed in the right place in the
BBLAYERS  variable.
After parsing all the layers in use, BitBake starts to parse the metadata. The
first parsed metadata in BitBake is configuration metadata, identified by the
.conf file extension. This metadata is global and, therefore, affects all executed
recipes and tasks.
NOTE
One typical example of the conﬁguration ﬁle is the machine ﬁle, which has a list of settings that describes
the hardware.

--- Page 65 ---
BitBake first loads meta/conf/bitbake.conf from one of the paths included in the
BBPATH list. The meta/conf/bitbake.conf file uses include directives to pull in
metadata, such as architecture-specific metadata, machine configuration files,
and the build/conf/local.conf file. One significant restriction of BitBake
configuration files (.conf) is that only variable definitions and include directives
are allowed.
BitBake’s classes (.bbclass) are a rudimentary inheritance mechanism in the
classes/ directories. When an inherit directive appears during parsing, BitBake
immediately parses the linked class. The class content is searched based on the
order of the BBPATH variable list.
The BBFILES variable is a space-separated list of the .bb and .bbappend files and can
use wildcards. It is required in every layer inside conf/layer.conf, so BitBake
knows where to look for recipes. A BitBake recipe (.bb) is a logical unit of tasks
to be executed; typically, it refers to a package.
Dependencies
From the BitBake point of view, there are three different dependency types:
Build time
Execution time
Tasks
An application that needs some other package, such as a library, has a build
dependency for a successful compilation. Build dependencies include
compilers. libraries, and native build tools (such as CMake). In addition, a
build dependency has an execution dependency whenever an application is
needed only during execution time. Runtime dependencies include fonts, icons,
dynamically opened libraries, and language interpreters.
TIP
The convention inside Poky is to use -native  suﬃxes for recipe names. This is because those tools are
aimed to be run during the build process, in the host building system, and are not deployed into the target.
The task dependencies create order in the chaos of task execution – for
example, to compile a package, the source code needs to be downloaded.
Under the hood, all the dependencies are task dependencies. This means that

--- Page 66 ---
when package B has a build-time dependency on package A, the tasks from
package A need to be completed before package B starts.
Metadata expresses all the dependencies. OpenEmbedded Core provides a vast
set of classes to handle the default task dependencies commonly used – for
example, a recipe can express a build-time dependency with the DEPENDS variable
and an execution-time dependence with the RDEPENDS variable.
Knowing the recipe dependencies chain, BitBake can sort all the recipes for the
build in a feasible order. BitBake organizes tasks in the following ways:
Recipe tasks that do not have a dependency relation are built in parallel
Dependent recipes are built in serial order and sorted in a way that satisfies the dependencies
TIP
Every recipe included in the runtime dependencies is added to the build list. This sounds obvious, but even
though they have no role during the build, they need to be ready for use so that the resulting binary
packages are installable. This will be required when building images or populating feeds.
Preferring and providing recipes
Dependency is a relation between two things; one side can only be fulfilled if
the other side exists. However, a dependency only specifies that some
functionality or characteristic is needed to be fulfilled, not precisely how it
must be fulfilled.
For example, when a recipe depends on A, the first thought is that it depends on
a recipe called A. However, there are two possible ways to satisfy the
dependency requirement of A:
A recipe called A
A recipe that provides a functionality or characteristic called A
For a recipe to communicate to BitBake that it can fulfill a functionality or
characteristic requirement, it must use the PROVIDES keyword. A subtle
consequence is that two or more recipes can deliver the same functionality or
characteristic. We must inform BitBake which recipe should fulfill that
requirement using the PREFERRED_PROVIDER keyword.
So, if a recipe called foo_1.0.bb depends on bar, BitBake lists all recipes providing
bar. The bar dependency can be satisfied by the following:
A recipe with the bar_<version>.bb  format because every recipe provides itself by default

--- Page 67 ---
A recipe where the PROVIDES  variable includes bar
The virtual/kernel provider is a clear example of this mechanism. The virtual/
namespace is the convention adopted when we have a set of commonly
overridden providers.
All recipes that require the kernel to be built can add virtual/kernel to the
dependency list (DEPENDS), and BitBake satisfies the dependency. When we have
more than one recipe with an alternative provider, we must choose one to be
used – for example, the following:
Figure 5.3 – An e xample of how to set a pr eferred pr ovider for virtual/k ernel
The virtual/kernel provider is commonly set in the machine definition file, as it
can vary from machine to machine. We will see how to create a machine
definition file in Chapter 12, Creating Custom Layers.
NOTE
BitBake raises an error when a dependency cannot be satisﬁed due to a missing provider .
When BitBake has two providers with different versions, it uses the highest
version by default. However, we can force BitBake to use a different version by
using PREFERRED_VERSION. This is common in BSPs, such as bootloaders, where
vendors may use specific versions for a board.
We can avoid using a development or an unreliable recipe version, by default,
lowering the version preference by using the DEFAULT_PREFERENCE keyword in a
recipe file, as follows:
Figure 5.4 – How to lower the version pr eference in a r ecipe
So, even if the version is higher, the recipe is not choosen without
PREFERRED_VERSION being explicitly set to use it.
Fetching the source code
When we download the Poky source code, we download the metadata collection
and the BitBake tool. One of the main features supported by BitBake is
additional source code fetching.

--- Page 68 ---
The ability of fetching external source code is as modular and flexible as
possible. For example, every Linux-based system includes the Linux kernel and
several other utilities that form the root filesystem, such as OpenSSH or
BusyBox.
The OpenSSH source code is available from its upstream website as a tar.gz file
hosted on an HTTP server, while the Linux kernel release is in a Git repository.
Therefore, BitBake can easily fetch those two different instances of source
code.
BitBake offers support for many different fetcher modules that allow the
retrieval of tarball files and several other SCM systems, such as the following:
Amazon AWS S3
Android repo
Azure Storage
Bazaar
ClearCase
CVS
FTP
Git
Git Annex
Git submodules
HTTP(S)
Mercurial
NPM
NPMSW (npm shrinkwrap  implementation)
openSUSE Build Service client
Perforce
Rust Crate
SFTP
SSH
Subversion
The mechanism used by BitBake to fetch the source code is internally called a
fetcher backend, which is configurable to align a user’s requirements and
optimize fetching the source code.

--- Page 69 ---
Remote file downloads
BitBake supports several methods for remote file downloads. The most
commonly used are http://, https://, and git://. We won’t cover the internal
details of how BitBake handles remote file downloads and will instead focus on
its visible effects.
When BitBake executes the do_fetch task in a recipe, it checks the SRC_URI
contents. Let’s look at, for example, the pm-utils recipe (available at meta/recipes-
bsp/pm-utils/pm-utils_1.4.1.bb). The processed variables are shown in the following
figure:
Figure 5.5 – SR C_URI for the pm-utils_1.4.1.bb r ecipe
BitBake expands the PV variable to the package version (1.4.1 in this example is
taken from the pm-utils_1.4.1.bb recipe filename) to download the file from
http://pm-utils.freedesktop.org/releases/pm-utils-1.4.1.tar.gz, and then saves it
as DL_DIR, which points to the download storage directory.
After the download is complete, BitBake compares the sha256sum value of the
downloaded file with the value from the recipe. If the value matches, it creates
a ${DL_DIR}/pm-utils-1.4.1.tar.gz.done file to mark the file as successfully
downloaded and checked, allowing BitBake to reuse it.
NOTE
By default, the DL_DIR  variable points to build/downloads . You can override this by adding to the
build/conf/local.conf  ﬁle the following line – DL_DIR = "/my/download-cache" . Using this, we can
share the same download cache among several build directories, thus saving download time and
bandwidth.
Git repositories
One of the most commonly used source control management systems is Git.
BitBake has solid support for Git, and the Git backend is used when the do_fetch
task is run and finds a git:// URL at the beginning of the SRC_URI variable.
The default way for BitBake’s Git backend to handle the repositories is to clone
the repository in ${DL_DIR}/git2/<git URL> – for example, check the following quote

--- Page 70 ---
from the lz4_1.9.4.bb recipe found in meta/recipes-support/lz4/lz4_1.9.4.bb inside
Poky:
Figure 5.6 – Sour ce code download conﬁguration for the lz4_1.9.4.bb r ecipe
Here, the lz4.git repository is cloned in ${DL_DIR}/git2/ github.com.lz4.lz4.git. This
directory name avoids conflicts between possible Git repositories with the same
project name.
There are two cases where the SRCREV variable has an impact. They are as
follows:
do_fetch : This task uses the SRCREV  variable to ensure the repository has the required Git revision
do_unpack : This task uses SRCREV  to set up the working directory with the necessary source revision
NOTE
We need to use the branch=<branch name>  parameter as follows – SRC_URI =
"git://myserver/myrepo.git;branch=mybranch"  – to specify the branch that contains the revision we
want to use. In cases when the hash used points to a tag that is not available on a branch, we need to use
the nobranch=1  option as follows – SRC_URI = " git://myserver/myrepo.git;nobranch=1" .
The remote file and the Git repository are the most commonly used fetch
backends of BitBake. The other source code management-supported systems
vary in their implementations, but the general ideas and concepts are the same.
Optimizing the source code download
To improve the robustness of source code download, Poky provides a mirror
mechanism that can provide the following:
A centrally preferred server for download
A set of fallback servers
To provide this robust download mechanism, BitBake follows defined logic
steps. During the build, the first BitBake step is to search for the source code
within the local download directory (specified by DL_DIR). If this fails, the next
step is to try the locations defined by the PREMIRRORS variable. Finally, BitBake
searches the locations specified in the MIRRORS variable in a failure case. In
summary, these steps are as follows:
1. DL_DIR : Look for the download on the host machine.

--- Page 71 ---
2. MIRRORS : Search for the download in a list of mirrors.
3. PREMIRRORS : This is used to reduce the download from external servers and is usually used inside
companies to reduce or forbid internet use.
For example, when configuring a local server, https://mylocalserver, as PREMIRROR,
we can add the following code to a global configuration file, such as
build/conf/local.conf:
Figure 5.7 – An e xample of the PREMIRRORS conﬁguration
The preceding code prepends the PREMIRRORS variable to change and instructs the
build system to intercept any download requests. It redirects them to the
https://mylocalserver source’s mirror.
This use of PREMIRRORS is so common that there is a class to help its configuration.
To make it easier, we inherit the own-mirror class and then set the SOURCE_MIRROR_URL
variable to https://mylocalserver in any global configuration file, such as
build/conf/local.conf.
Figure 5.8 – How to conﬁgur e own-mirr or
If the desired component is unavailable in the source mirror, BitBake falls back
to the MIRRORS variable. An example of the content of this variable is shown in the
following figure. It shows some servers used in mirrors.bbclass, inherited by
default in Poky:

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 5.9 – An e xample of how to use the MIRRORS variable
TIP
Let’s suppose the goal is to have a shareable download cache. In that case, it is advisable to enable the
tarball generation for the SCM backends (for example, Git) in the download folder with
BB_GENERATE_MIRROR_TARBALLS = "1"  in build/conf/local.conf .
Disabling network access
Sometimes, we need to ensure that we don’t connect to the internet during the
build process. There are several valid reasons for this, such as the following:
Policy : Our company does not allow the inclusion of external sources in a product without proper
legal validation and review.
Network cost : When we are on the road using mobile broadband, the cost of data may be too high
because the data to download may be extensive.
Download and build decoupling : This setup is typical in continuous integration environments,
where a job is responsible for downloading all the required source code. In contrast, the build jobs
have internet access disabled. The decoupling between downloading and building ensures that no
source code is downloaded in duplication and that we have cached all the necessary source code.
Lack of network access : Sometimes, we do not have access to a network.
To disable the network connection, we need to add the following code in the
build/conf/local.conf file:

--- Page 73 ---
Figure 5.10 – How to disable network access during the build
Understanding BitBake’s tasks
BitBake uses execution units, which are, in essence, a set of clustered
instructions that run in sequence. These units are known as tasks. During
every recipe’s build, BitBake, schedules, executes, and checks many tasks
provided by classes to form the framework we use to build a recipe. Therefore,
it is essential to understand some of these, as we often use, extend, implement,
or replace them ourselves when writing a recipe.
When we run the following command, BitBake runs a set of scheduled tasks:
Figure 5.11 – How to run all tasks for a r ecipe
When we wish to run a specific task, we can use the following command:
Figure 5.12 – How to run a particular task for a r ecipe
To list the tasks defined for a recipe, we can use the following command:
Figure 5.13 – How to list all tasks for a r ecipe
The output of listtasks for the wget recipe is as follows:

--- Page 74 ---
Figure 5.14 – The list of tasks for the wget r ecipe
We will briefly describe the most commonly used tasks here:
do_fetch : The first step when building a recipe is fetching the required source using the fetching
backends feature, which we discussed previously in this chapter. It is essential to note that fetching a
source or a file does not mean it is a remote source.
do_unpack : The subsequent natural task after the do_fetch  task is do_unpack . This is responsible for
unpacking source code or checking out the requested revision or branch in case the referenced
source uses an SCM system.
do_patch : Once the source code is properly unpacked, BitBake initiates adapting the source code.
Every file fetched by do_fetch , with the .patch  extension, is assumed to be a patch to be applied.
This task applies the list of patches needed. The final modified source code will be used to build the
package.
do_configure , do_compile , and do_install : The do_configure , do_compile , and do_install  tasks
are performed in this order. It is important to note that the environment variables defined in the tasks
are different from one task to another. Poky provides a rich collection of predefined tasks in the
classes, which we ought to use when possible – for example, when a recipe inherits the autotools
class, it provides a known implementation of the do_configure , do_compile , and do_install  tasks.

--- Page 75 ---
do_package : The do_package  task splits the files installed by the recipe into logical components, such
as debugging symbols, documentation, and libraries. We will cover packaging details in more depth in
Chapter 7 , Assimilating Package Support .
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how recipes depend on each other and how Poky
deals with dependencies. We understood how a download is configured and
how to optimize it. In addition, we got a better view of the tasks managed by
BitBake to download all the required source code and use it to build and
generate packages.
In the next chapter, we will see the contents of the build directory after
complete image generation and learn how BitBake uses it in the baking
process, including the contents of the temporary build directory and its
generated files.

--- Page 76 ---
6
Detailing the Temporary Build Directory
In this chapter, we will try to understand the contents of the temporary build
directory after image generation and see how BitBake uses it in the baking
process. In addition, we will learn how some of these directories can assist us
by acting as a valuable source of information when things do not work as
expected.
Detailing the build directory
The build directory is a central information and artifact source for every Poky
user. Its main directories are as follows:
conf : This contains the configuration files we use to control Poky and BitBake. We first used this
directory in Chapter 2 , Baking Our P oky-Based System . It stores configuration files, such as
build/conf/local.conf  and build/conf/bblayers.conf .
downloads : This stores all the downloaded artifacts. It works as a download cache. We talked about it
in detail in Chapter 5 , Grasping the BitBake T ool.
sstate-cache : This contains the snapshots of the packaged data. It is a cache mainly used to speed
up the future build process, as it is used as a cache for the building process. This folder is detailed in
Chapter 7 , Assimilating Packaging Support .
tmp: This is the temporary build directory and the main focus of this chapter.
Constructing the build directory
In the previous chapters, we learned about Poky’s inputs and outputs in
abstract high-level detail. We already know that BitBake uses metadata to
generate different types of artifacts, including images. Besides the generated
artifacts, BitBake creates other content during this process, which may be used
in several ways, dependent on our goals.
BitBake performs several tasks and continuously modifies the build directory
during the build process. Therefore, we can understand it better by following
the usual BitBake execution flow, as follows:
Fetching : The first action executed by BitBake is to download the source code. This step may modify
the build directory as it tries to use the cached downloaded copy of the source code or performs the

--- Page 77 ---
download and stores it inside the build/download  directory.
Source preparation : After completing the source code fetching, it must be prepared; for example,
the unpacking of a tarball or a clone of a locally cached Git directory (from the download cache). This
preparation happens in the build/tmp/work  directory. When the source code is ready, the required
modifications are applied (for example, applying necessary patches and checking out the correct Git
revision).
Conﬁguration and building : The building process starts with the ready-to-use  source code. It
involves the configuration of build options (for example, ./configure ) and building (for example,
make ).
Installing : The built artifacts are then installed (for example, make install ) in a staging directory
under build/tmp/work/<...>/image .
Wrapping the sysroot : The artifacts required for cross-compilation, such as libraries, headers, and
other files, are copied and sometimes modified to build/tmp/work/<...>/recipe-sysroot  and
build/tmp/work/<...>/recipe-sysroot-native .
Creating the packages : The packages are generated using the installed contents, potentially
splitting this content across multiple packages, which can be provided in different formats, for
example, .rpm , .ipk , .deb , or .tar .
Quality Assurance (QA) checks : When building a recipe, the build system performs various QA
checks on the output to ensure that common issues are detected and reported.
Exploring the temporary build directory
Understanding the temporary build directory (build/tmp) is critical. The
temporary build directory is created just after the build starts, and it’s essential
for helping us identify why something didn’t behave as expected.
The following figure shows the contents of the build/tmp directory:


--- Page 78 ---
Figure 6.1 – Contents of build/tmp
The most critical directories found within it are as follows:
deploy : This contains the build products, such as images, binary packages, and SDK installers.
sysroots-components : This contains a representation of recipes-sysroot  and recipes-sysroot-
native , which allows BitBake to know where each component is installed. This is used to create
recipe-specific sysroots  during the build.
sysroots-uninative : This includes glibc  (a C library), which is used when native utilities are
generated. This, in turn, improves the reuse of shared state artifacts across different host
distributions.
work : This contains the working source code, a task’s configuration, execution logs, and the contents
of generated packages.
work-shared : This is a work  directory used for sharing the source code with multiple recipes. work-
shared  is only used by a subset of recipes, for example, linux-yocto  and gcc.
Understanding the work directory
The build/tmp/work directory is organized by architecture. For example, when
working with the qemux86-64 machine, we have the following four directories:
Figure 6.2 – The contents of the build/tmp/work  directory
Figure 6.2 shows an example of possible directories under build/tmp/work for an
x86-64 host and a qemux86-64 target. They are architecture- and machine-
dependent, as follows:
all-poky-linux : This directory contains the working build directories for the architecture-agnostic
packages. These are mostly scripts or interpreted language-based packages, for example, Perl scripts
and Python scripts.
core2-64-poky-linux : This directory contains the working build directories for the packages common
to x86-64 -based targets using the optimization tuned for core2-64 .
qemux86_64-poky-linux : This directory contains the working build directories for packages specific
to the qemux86-64  machine.
x86_64-linux : This directory holds the working build directories for the packages that are targeted to
run on the build host machine.

--- Page 79 ---
This componentized structure is necessary to allow building system images and
packages for multiple machines and architectures within one build directory
without conflicts. The target machine we will use is qemux86-64.
The build/tmp/work directory is useful when checking for misbehavior or building
failures. Its contents are organized in sub-directories following this pattern:
Figure 6.3 – The patter n used in sub-dir ectories of the build/tmp/work dir ectory
Some of the directories under the tree shown in Figure 6.3 are as follows:
<sources> : This is extracted source code of the software to be built. The WORKDIR  variable points to
this directory.
image : This contains the files installed by the recipe.
package : The extracted contents of output packages are stored here.
packages-split : The contents of output packages, extracted and split into sub-directories, are stored
here.
temp : This stores BitBake’s task code and execution logs.
TIP
We can automatically remove the work  directory after each recipe compilation cycle to reduce disk usage,
adding INHERIT += "rm_work"  in the build/conf/local.conf  ﬁle.
The structure of the work directory is the same for all architectures. For every
recipe, a directory with the recipe name is created. Taking the machine-specific
work directory and using the sysvinit-inittab recipe as an example, we see the
following:

--- Page 80 ---
Figure 6.4 – Content of build/tmp/work/cor e2-64-pok y-linux/pm-utils/1.4.1-r1/
The sysvinit-inittab recipe is an excellent example, as it is machine-specific. This
recipe contains the inittab file that defines the serial console to spawn the login
process, which varies from machine to machine.
NOTE
The build system uses the directories shown in the preceding ﬁgure that are not detailed here. Therefore,
you should not need to work with them, except if you are working on build tool development.
The work directory is handy for debugging purposes; we cover this in Chapter
10, Debugging with the Yocto Project.
Understanding the sysroot directories

--- Page 81 ---
The sysroot directory plays a critical role in the Yocto Project. It creates an
individual and isolated environment for each recipe. This environment, set for
each recipe, is essential to ensure reproducibility and avoid contamination with
the host machine’s packages.
After we build the procps recipe, version 3.3.17, we get two sets of sysroot
directories – recipes-sysroot and recipes-sysroot-native.
Inside each sysroot set, there is a sub-directory called sysroot-provides. This
directory lists the packages installed on each respective sysroot. Following is the
recipe-sysroot directory:
Figure 6.5 – Content of the r ecipe-sysr oot dir ectory under build/tmp/work for r ecipe pr ocps
The recipe-sysroot-native directory includes the build dependencies used on the
host system during the build process. It encompasses the compiler, linker,
tools, and more. At the same time, the recipe-sysroot directory has the libraries
and headers used in the target code. The following figure shows the recipe-
sysroot-native directory:

--- Page 82 ---
Figure 6.6 – Content of the r ecipe-sysr oot-native dir ectory under build/tmp/work for r ecipe pr ocps
When we see a missing header or a link failure, we must double-check whether
our sysroot directory (target and host) contents are correct.
Summary
In this chapter, we explored the contents of the temporary build directory after
image generation. We saw how BitBake uses it during the baking process.
In the next chapter, we will better understand how packaging is done in Poky,
how to use package feeds, the Package Revision (PR) service, and how they
may help our product maintenance.

--- Page 83 ---
7
Assimilating Packaging Support
This chapter presents the key concepts for understanding the aspects of Poky
and BitBake related to packaging. We will learn about the supported binary
package formats, shared state cache, package versioning components, how to
set up and use binary package feeds to support our development process, and
more.
Using supported package formats
From a Yocto Project perspective, a recipe may generate one or more output
packages. A package wraps a set of files and metadata in a way that makes
them available in the future. They can be installed into one or more images or
deployed for later use.
Packages are critical to Poky, as they enable the build system to produce
diverse types of artifacts, such as images and toolchains.
List of supported package formats
Currently, BitBake supports four different package formats:
Red Hat P ackage Manager  (RPM ): Originally named Red Hat Package Manager but now known as
the RPM package format since its adoption by several other Linux distributions, this is a popular
format in use in Linux distributions such as SuSE, OpenSuSE, Red Hat, Fedora, and CentOS.
Debian P ackage Manager  (DEB ): This is a widespread format used in Debian and several other
Debian-based distributions – Ubuntu Linux and Linux Mint are the most widely known.
Itsy P ackage Management System  (IPK): This was a lightweight package management system
designed for embedded devices that resembled Debian’s package format. The opkg  package manager,
which supports the IPK format, is used in several distributions such as OpenEmbedded Core,
OpenWRT, and Poky.
Tar: This is derived from the Tape Archive , a widely used tarball  file type used to group several
files into just a single file.
Choosing a package format

--- Page 84 ---
The support for formats is provided using a set of classes (i.e., package_rpm,
package_deb, and package_ipk). We can select one or more formats using the
PACKAGE_CLASSES variable, as shown in the following example:
Figure 7.1 – The variable used to conﬁgur e which pack age for mat to use
You can configure one or more package formats – for example, in the
build/conf/local.conf file.
TIP
The ﬁrst package format in PACKAGE_CLASSES  is the one used for image generation.
Poky defaults to the RPM package format, which uses the DNF package
manager. However, the format choice depends on several factors, such as
package format-specific features, memory, and resource usage. OpenEmbedded
Core defaults to the IPK and opkg as the package manager, as it offers a smaller
memory and resource usage footprint.
On the other hand, users familiar with Debian-based systems may prefer to use
the APT and DEB package formats for their products.
Running code during package installation
Packages can use scripts as part of their installation and removal process. The
included scripts are defined as follows:
preinst : This executes before unpacking the package. If the package has services, it must stop them
for installation or upgrade.
postinst : After unpacking, this typically completes any required configuration of the package. Many
postinst  scripts execute any command necessary to start or restart a service after installation or
upgrade.
prerm : It usually stops any daemon associated with a package before removing files associated with
the package.
postrm : This commonly modifies links or other files created by the package.
The preinst and prerm scripts target complex use cases, such as data migration
when updating packages. In the Yocto Project case, postinst and postrm are also
responsible for stopping and starting the systemd or sysvinit services. A default
script is provided when we use the systemd and update-rc.d classes. It can be
customized to include any particular case.

--- Page 85 ---
The post-package installation (postinst) scripts are run during the root filesystem
creation. The package is marked as installed if the script returns a success
value. To add a postinst script for a package, we can use the following:
Figure 7.2 – An e xample of the pkg_postinst script
Sometimes, we need to ensure that postinst runs inside the target device itself.
This can be done using the postinst_ontarget variant, such as the following:
Figure 7.3 – An e xample of the pkg_postinst_ontar get script
TIP
Instead of using the package name itself , we can use the PN variable, which automatically expands the
package name of the recipe.
All post-installation scripts must succeed when we generate an image with read-
only-rootfs in IMAGE_FEATURES. Because it is impossible to write in a read-only rootfs,
the check must occur during build time. It ensures that we identify the problem
while building the image, rather than during the initial boot operation in the
target device. If there is a requirement to run any script inside the target
device, the do_rootfs task fails.
TIP
Eventually , using a whole image as read-only is not an option. For example, some projects may need to
persist some data or even allow some applications to write to a volatile directory . Such use cases are
outside the scope of this book. However , you might ﬁnd some helpful information in the Yocto Project
Reference Manual  for the overlayfs  (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref -
manual/classes.html#overlayfs-bbclass ) and overlayfs-etc  (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref -
manual/classes.html#overlayfs-etc-bbclass ) classes.
One common oversight when creating post-installation scripts is the lack of the
D variable in front of absolute paths. D has two traits:
During rootfs  generation, D is set to the root of the working directory
Inside the device, D is empty

--- Page 86 ---
Consequently, this ensures that paths are valid in both host and target
environments. For example, consider the following code:
Figure 7.4 – Sample sour ce code using the D variable
In the example in Figure 7.4, the touch command uses the D variable, so it works
generically depending on its value.
Another common mistake is attempting to run processes specific to or
dependent on the target architecture. The easiest solution, in this case, is to
postpone the script execution to the target (using pkg_postinst_ontarget).
However, as mentioned before, this prevents the use of read-only filesystems.
Understanding shared state cache
The default behavior of Poky is to build everything from scratch unless BitBake
determines that a recipe does not need to be rebuilt. The main advantage of
building everything from scratch is that the result is fresh, and there is no risk
of previous data causing problems. However, rebuilding everything requires
computational time and resources.
The strategy to determine whether a recipe must be rebuilt is complex. BitBake
tries to track as much information as possible about every task, variable, and
piece of code used in the build process. BitBake then generates a checksum for
the information used by every task, including dependencies from other tasks. In
summary, BitBake recursively tracks used variables, task source code, and
dependencies for the recipes and their dependencies.
Poky uses all this information provided by BitBake to store snapshots of those
tasks as a set of packaged data, generated in a cache called the shared state
cache (sstate-cache). This cache wraps the contents of each task output in
packages stored in the SSTATE_DIR directory. Whenever BitBake prepares to run a
task, it first checks the existence of a sstate-cache package that matches the
required computed checksum. If the package is present, BitBake uses the
prebuilt package.

--- Page 87 ---
The whole shared state mechanism encompasses quite complex code, and the
previous explanation simplifies it. For a detailed description, it is advised that
you go through the Shared State Cache section of the Yocto Project Overview
and Concepts Manual (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/overview-
manual/concepts.html#shared-state-cache).
When using Poky for several builds, we must remember that sstate-cache needs
cleaning from time to time, since it keeps growing after every build. There is a
straightforward way of cleaning it. Use the following command from the poky
directory:
Figure 7.5 – The command line to r emove a duplicated Shar ed State Cache
TIP
When we need to rebuild from scratch, we can do either of the following:
Remove build/tmp  so that we can use sstate-cache  to speed up the build
Remove both build/tmp  and sstate-cache  so that no cache is reused during the build
Explaining package versioning
Package versioning is used to differentiate the same package in distinct stages
of its life cycle. From Poky’s perspective, it is also used as part of the equation
that generates the checksum used by BitBake to verify whether a task must be
rebuilt.
The package version, also known as PV, plays a leading role when we select
which recipe to build. The default behavior of Poky is always to prefer the
newest recipe version unless there is a different explicit preference, as
discussed in Chapter 5, Grasping the BitBake Tool. For example, let’s suppose
that we have two versions of the myrecipe recipe:
myrecipe_1.0.bb
myrecipe_1.1.bb
BitBake, by default, builds the recipe with version 1.1. Inside the recipe, we
may have other variables that compose package versioning with the PV variable.
These are the package epoch, known as PE, and the package revision, known
as PR.

--- Page 88 ---
Those variables normally follow this pattern:
Figure 7.6 – A complete versioning patter n
The PE variable has a default value of zero. It is used when the package version
schema is changed, breaking the possibility of usual ordering. PE is prepended
in the package version, forcing a higher number when needed.
For example, suppose a package uses the date to compose PV variables such as
20220101, and there is a version schema change to release the 1.0 version. It is
impossible to determine whether version 1.0 is higher than version 20220101. So,
PE = "1" is used to change the recipe epoch, forcing version 1.0 to be higher than
20220101, since 1:1.0 is greater than 0:20220101.
The PR variable has a default value of r0 and is a part of package versioning.
When it is updated, it forces BitBake to rebuild all tasks of a specific recipe. We
can update it manually in the recipe metadata to force a rebuild we know is
needed. Still, it is fragile because it relies on human interaction and knowledge.
BitBake uses task checksums to control what needs to be rebuilt. The manual PR
increment is only used in rare cases when the task checksum does not change.
Specifying runtime package dependencies
The results of most recipes are packages managed by the package manager. As
we saw in the previous sections, it requires information about all those
packages and how they relate. For example, a package may depend on or
conflict with another.
Constraints exist within multiple package relationships; however, those
constraints are package format-specific, so BitBake has specific metadata to
abstract those constraints.
Here is a list of the most used package runtime constraints:
RDEPENDS : The list of packages must be available at runtime, along with the package that defines it.
RPROVIDES : This is the list of symbolic names a package provides. By default, a package always
includes the package name as a symbolic name. It can also include alternative symbolic names
provided by that package.
RCONFLICTS : This is the list of packages known to conflict with the package. The final image must not
include conflicting packages.

--- Page 89 ---
RREPLACES : This is a list of symbolic names that the package can replace.
A full recipe, from meta/recipes-devtools/python/python3-dbus_1.2.18.bb, is as follows:
Figure 7.7 – An e xample of how to use RDEPENDS
The recipe from Figure 7.6 shows that the python3-dbus package has a list of
runtime dependencies on several Python modules, on line 21.
Using packages to generate a rootfs image
One of the most common uses of Poky is the rootfs image generation. The rootfs
image should be seen as a ready-to-use root filesystem for a target. The image
can be composed of one or more filesystems. It may include other artifacts
available during its generation, such as the Linux kernel, the device tree, and
bootloader binaries. The process of generating the image is composed of
several steps. Its most common uses are as follows:
1. Generating the rootfs  directory
2. Creating the required files
3. Wrapping the final filesystem according to the specific requirements (it may be a disk file with several
partitions and contents)
4. Finally, compressing it, if applicable

--- Page 90 ---
The sub-tasks of do_rootfs perform all these steps. rootfs is a directory with the
desired packages installed, with the required tweaks applied afterward. The
tweaks make minor adjustments to the rootfs contents – for example, when
building a development image, rootfs is adjusted to allow us to log in as root
without a password.
The list of packages to be installed into rootfs is defined by a union of packages
listed by IMAGE_INSTALL and the packages included with IMAGE_FEATURES; image
customization is detailed in Chapter 12, Creating Custom Layers. Each image
feature can include extra packages for installation – for example, dev-pkgs, which
installs development libraries and headers of all packages listed to be installed
in rootfs.
The list of packages to be installed is now filtered by the PACKAGE_EXCLUDE variable,
which lists the packages that should not be installed. The packages listed in
PACKAGE_EXCLUDE are only excluded from the list of packages to be explicitly
installed.
With the final set of packages to install, the do_rootfs task can initiate the
process of unpacking and configuring each package, and its required
dependencies, into the rootfs directory. The rootfs generation uses the local
package feed, which we will cover in the next section.
With the rootfs contents unpacked, the non-target post-installation scripts of the
referred packages must run to avoid the penalty of running them during the
first boot.
Now, the directory is ready to generate the filesystem. IMAGE_FSTYPES lists the
filesystem to be generated – for example, EXT4 or UBIFS.
After the do_rootfs task has finished, the generated image file is placed in
build/tmp/deploy/image/<machine>/. The process of creating our image and the
possible values for IMAGE_FEATURES and IMAGE_FSTYPES are described in Chapter 12,
Creating Custom Layers.
Package feeds
As discussed in Chapter 5, Grasping the BitBake Tool, packages play a vital
role, as images and Software Development Kits (SDKs) rely on them. In fact,

--- Page 91 ---
do_rootfs uses a local repository to fetch binary packages when generating those
artifacts. This repository is known as a package feed.
There is no reason for this repository to be used just for the images or SDK
build steps. Several valid reasons exist for making this repository remotely
accessible, either internally in our development environment or publicly. Some
of these reasons are as follows:
You can easily test an updated application during the development stage, without requiring a
complete system re-installation
You can make additional packages more flexible so that they can be installed in a running image
You can update products in the field
To produce a solid package feed, we must ensure that we have consistent
increments in the package revision every time the package is changed. It is
almost impossible to do this manually, and the Yocto Project has a PR service
specifically designed to help with this.
The PR service, part of BitBake, is used to increment PR without human
interaction every time BitBake detects a checksum change in a task. It injects a
suffix in PR in the ${PR}.X format. For example, if we have PR = "r34" after
subsequent PR service interactions, the PR value becomes r34.1, r34.2, r34.3, and
so on. The use of the PR service is critical for solid package feeds, as it requires
the version to increase linearly.
TIP
Even though we ought to use the PR service to have solid package versioning, it does not preclude the
need to set PR manually in exceptional cases.
By default, the PR service is not enabled or running. We can enable it to run
locally by adding the PRSERV_HOST variable in the BitBake configuration – for
example, in build/conf/local.conf, as in the following:
Figure 7.8 – How to conﬁgur e a PR service to run locally
This approach is adequate when the build happens on a single computer, which
builds every package of the package feed. BitBake starts and stops the server
at each build and automatically increases the required PR values.
For a more complex setup, with multiple computers working against a shared
package feed, we must have a single PR service running, used by all building

--- Page 92 ---
systems associated with the package feed. In this case, we need to start the PR
service in the server using the bitbake-prserv command, shown as follows:
Figure 7.9 – The command line to initiate the PR service server
In addition to manually-starting the service, we need to update the BitBake
configuration file (for example, build/conf/local.conf) of each build system, which
connects to a server using the PRSERV_HOST variable, as described earlier, so that
each system points to the server IP and port.
Using package feeds
To use package feeds, the following two components are required:
The server provides access to the packages
The client accesses the server and downloads the required packages
The set of packages offered by the package feed is determined by the recipes
we build. We can build one or more recipes and offer them, or build a set of
images to generate the desired packages. Once satisfied with the packages
offered, we must create the package index provided by the package feeds. The
following command performs this:
Figure 7.10 – The command line to cr eate the pack age inde x
The packages are available inside the build/tmp/deploy directory. We must choose
the respective sub-directory depending on the package format chosen. Poky
uses RPM by default, so we must serve the content of the build/tmp/deploy/rpm
directory.
TIP
Make sure to run bitbake package-index  after building all packages; otherwise, the package index will
not include them.
The package index and packages must be made available through a transfer
protocol such as HTTP. We can use any server we wish for this task, such as
Apache, Nginx, and Lighttpd. A convenient way to make the packages available

--- Page 93 ---
through HTTP for local development is by using the Python simple HTTP
server, shown as follows:
Figure 7.11 – How to pr ovide the pack age feed by using the Python simple HT TP server
To add support for package management to the image, we have a couple of
changes to make. We need to add package-management in EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES and set
the URI for package fetching on PACKAGE_FEED_URIS. For example, we can add this
to our build/conf/local.conf:
Figure 7.12 – How to conﬁgur e a remote pack age feed
We will detail the IMAGE_FEATURES and EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES variables in Chapter 12,
Creating Custom Layers. If we want a small image with no package
management support, we should omit package-management from EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES.
The PACKAGE_FEED_URIS and EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES configurations guarantee that the
image on the client side can access the server and has the utilities needed to
install, remove, and upgrade its packages. After these steps, we can use the
runtwime package management in the target device.
For example, if we choose the RPM package format for the image, we can fetch
the repository information using the following command:
Figure 7.13 – Command line to fetch the pack age feed r epository
Use the dnf search <package>, and dnf install <package> commands to find and install
packages from the repositories.
Depending on the package format chosen, the commands for the target to
update the package index, search for, and install a package are different. See
the available command lines for each package format in the following table:
Package format RPM IPK DEB
Update the package indexdnf check-updatesopkg updateapt-get update

--- Page 94 ---
Search for a package dnf search
<package>opkg search
<package>apt-cache search
<package>
Install a package dnf install
<package>opkg install
<package>apt-get install
<package>
System upgrade dnf upgrade opkg upgradeapt-get dist- upgrade
Table 7.1 – A pack age management command comparison
The use of package feeds are great to use in a local development phase because
they enable us to install packages in an already deployed image.
NOTE
The use of package feeds for system upgrades in the ﬁeld requires a huge test eﬀort to guarantee that a
system does not fall into a broken state. The testing eﬀort is enormous to verify all diﬀerent upgrade
scenarios. Usually , full image upgrades are safer for production use.
The management of a package feed is much more complex. It involves several
other aspects, such as package dependency chains and different upgrade
scenarios. Creating a complex package feed external server is out of this book’s
scope, so please refer to the Yocto Project documentation for further details.
Summary
This chapter presented the basic concepts of packaging, which has a significant
role in Poky and BitBake (package versioning), and how this impacts Poky’s
behavior when rebuilding packages and package feeds. It also showed us how
to configure an image to be updated using prebuilt packages provided by a
remote server.
In the next chapter, we will learn about the BitBake metadata syntax and its
operators and how to append, prepend, and remove content from variables,
variable expansions, and so on. We will then be able to better understand the
language used in Yocto Project engines.

--- Page 95 ---
8
Diving into BitBake Metadata
At this point in this book, we know how to generate images and packages and
how to use package feeds – basically, everything we must know for the simple
usage of Poky. Hereafter, we will learn how to control the behavior of Poky to
accomplish our goals and achieve maximum benefit from the Yocto Project as a
whole.
This chapter will help enhance our understanding of the BitBake metadata
syntax. We will learn to use the BitBake operators to alter the content of
variables, variable expansions, and so on. These are the key concepts we can
use to make our recipes and the customization that we will learn about in the
following chapters.
Understanding BitBake’s metadata
The amount of metadata used by BitBake is enormous. Therefore, to get the
maximum benefit from Poky, we must master it. As we learned in Chapter 4,
Meeting the BitBake Tool, metadata covers three major areas:
Conﬁguration  (the .conf  files): The configuration files define the global content that configures how
the classes and recipes will work.
Classes  (the .bbclass  files): Classes can be inherited for easier maintenance and to promote code
reuse and avoid code duplication.
Recipes  (the .bb or .bbappend  files): The recipes describe the tasks to be run and provide the
required information to allow BitBake to generate the required task chain. They are the most
commonly used metadata, as they define the variables and tasks for the recipes. The most common
types of recipes generate packages and images.
The classes and recipes use a mix of Python and Shell Script code, which is
parsed by BitBake, generating a massive number of tasks and local states that
must still be executed after being parsed.
We will also learn about the operators and essential concepts we need to build
our recipes.

--- Page 96 ---
Working with metadata
The syntax used by BitBake metadata can be misleading and sometimes hard to
trace. However, we can check the value of each variable in BitBake-generated,
pre-processed recipe data by using the bitbake option (-e or --environment), as
follows:
Figure 8.1 – How to display the BitBak e envir onment
To understand how BitBake works, please refer to BitBake User Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/bitbake/2.0). The following sections will show
most of the syntax commonly used in recipes.
The basic variable assignment
The assignment of a variable can be done as shown here:
Figure 8.2 – An e xample of a variable assignment
In the preceding example, the value of the FOO variable is assigned to bar.
Variable assignment is core to the BitBake metadata syntax, as most examples
use variables.
The variable expansion
BitBake supports variable referencing. The syntax closely resembles Shell
Script, such as the following:
Figure 8.3 – An e xample of variable e xpansion
The preceding example results in A containing aValue and B containing before-
aValue-after. An important thing to bear in mind is that the variable only expands
when it is used, as shown here:
Figure 8.4 – The variables ar e only e xpanded when used

--- Page 97 ---
Figure 8.4 illustrates the lazy evaluation used by BitBake evaluation. The B
variable value is before-${A}-after until a task requires the variable value. The A
variable has been assigned to aNewValue in line 3; consequently, B evaluates
before-aNewValue-after.
Assigning a value if the variable is unassigned, using ?
=
When there is a need to assign a variable only if the variable is still unassigned,
the ?= operator can be used. The following code shows its use:
Figure 8.5 – An e xample of value
The same behavior happens if there are multiple ?= assignments to a single
variable. The first use of the ?= operator is responsible for assigning the
variable. Let’s look at the following example:
Figure 8.6 – An e xample of a second assignment being ignor ed
The A variable has been assigned to value on line 1, before the assignment of
ignoredAsAlreadyAssigned on line 2, which is ignored.
We need to consider that the = operator is stronger than the ?= operator, as it
assigns the value independently of the previous variable state, as shown here:
Figure 8.7 – An e xample showing that the ?= operator is weak er than the = operator
Hence, the A variable is assigned as changeValue.
Assigning a default value using ??=
Using the ??= operator is intended to provide a default value for a variable and
is a weaker version of the ?= operator.
Check out the following code:
Figure 8.8 – An e xample of how default values ar e assigned

--- Page 98 ---
In line 1, the A default value is assigned to firstValue, and then in line 2, the A
default value is changed to secondValue. As no other assignment is made to the A
variable, the final value is secondValue.
?= is an assignment operator, as seen before, and takes precedence over the ??=
operator, as can be seen in the following example:
Figure 8.9 – An e xample of the ??= operator being weak er than the ?= operator
The final value of A variable is thirdValue, as no assignment has been made until
line 3.
The immediate variable expansion
The := operator is used when there is a need to force the immediate expansion
of a variable. It results in the variable’s contents being expanded immediately
rather than when the variable is used, as follows:
Figure 8.10 – An e xample of immediate variable e xpansion
The value for B is assigned immediately, in line 2, and expands to aValue-after.
However, the value for C is only assigned when used and then set to newValue, as
A value has been set in line 3.
The list appending and prepending
The += operator, known as list appending, adds a new value after the original
one, separated with a space, as shown here:
Figure 8.11 – An e xample of list appending
In this example, the final value for A is originalValue appendedValue.
The =+ operator, known as list prepending, adds a new value before the original
one, separated with a space, as shown here:

--- Page 99 ---
Figure 8.12 – An e xample of list pr epending
In this example, the final value for A is prependedValue originalValue.
The string appending and prepending
The .= operator, known as string appending, adds a new value after the original
one, with no extra space, as shown here:
Figure 8.13 – An e xample of string appending
In this example, the final value for A is originalValueAppendedValue.
The =. operator, known as string prepending, adds the new value before the
original one with no extra space, as shown here:
Figure 8.14 – An e xample of string pr epending
In this example, the final value for A is prependedValueOriginalValue.
The :append and :prepend operators
The :append operator adds a new value after the original with no extra space, as
shown here:
Figure 8.15 – An e xample of how to use the :append operator
In this example, the final value for A is originalValueAppendedValue.
The :prepend operator adds the new value before the original with no extra
space, as shown here:
Figure 8.16 – An e xample of how to use the :pr epend operator
In this example, the final value for A is prependedValueOriginalValue.

--- Page 100 ---
You may have noticed that the :append and :prepend operators resemble the string
appending (.=) and prepending (=.) operators. Still, there is a subtle difference
between how the :append and :prepend operators and the string appending and
string prepending operators are parsed, as shown here:
Figure 8.17 – An e xample of the diﬀer ence between :append and the .= operator
Using the :append operator queues the operation for execution, which happens
after the line 2 assignment, resulting in A becoming valueAppendedValue. The .=
operator is immediate, so the assignment of line 4 replaces the value set on line
3, resulting in B becoming value.
The list item removal
The :remove operator drops a list item from the original content. For example,
see the following:
Figure 8.18 – An e xample of how to use the :r emove operator
In this example, A is now value1 value3. The :remove operator considers the
variable value as a list of strings separated by spaces so that the operator can
remove one or more items from the list. Note that every appending and
prepending operation has already finished when :remove is executed.
Conditional metadata sets
BitBake provides a very easy-to-use way to write conditional metadata through
a mechanism called o v e r r i d e s.
The OVERRIDES variable contains values separated by colons (:) and evaluated
from left to right. Each value is an item that we want to have conditional
metadata.
Let’s consider the next example:
Figure 8.19 – An e xample of the O VERRIDES variable

--- Page 101 ---
The linux override is less specific than arm and mymachine. The following example
shows how we can use OVERRIDES to set the A variable conditionally:
Figure 8.20 – An e xample of using O VERRIDES conditional setting
In this example, A will be linuxSpecificValue, due to the condition of linux being in
OVERRIDES.
Conditional appending
BitBake also supports appending and prepending variables, based on whether
something is in OVERRIDES, as shown in the following example:
Figure 8.21 – An e xample of using O VERRIDES conditional appending
In the preceding example, A is set to value armValue.
File inclusion
BitBake provides two directives for file inclusion – include and require.
With the include keyword, BitBake attempts to insert the file at the keyword
location, so it is optional. Let’s suppose the path specified on the include line is
relative; then, BitBake locates the first instance it can find within BBPATH. By
contrast, the require keyword raises ParseError if the required file cannot be
found.
TIP
The convention generally adopted  in the Y octo Project is to use a .inc  ﬁle to share the common code
between two or more recipe ﬁles.
Python variable expansion
BitBake makes it easy to use Python code in variable expansion with the
following syntax:
Figure 8.22 – An e xample of Python e xpansion syntax

--- Page 102 ---
This gives enormous flexibility to a user. We can see a Python function call in
the following example:
Figure 8.23 – An e xample of a Python command to print the curr ent date
This results in the A variable containing today’s date.
Defining executable metadata
Metadata recipes (.bb) and class files (.bbclass) can use Shell Script code, as
follows:
Figure 8.24 – An e xample of a task deﬁnition
The task definition is identical to setting a variable, except that this variable
happens to be an executable Shell Script code. When writing the task code, we
should not use Bash or Zsh-specific features, as the tasks can only rely on
POSIX-compatible features. When in doubt, an excellent way to test whether
your code is safe is to use the Dash shell to try it out.
Another way to inject code is by using Python code, as shown here:
Figure 8.25 – An e xample of a Python task deﬁnition
The task definition is similar, but it flags the task as Python so that BitBake
knows how to run it accordingly.
Defining Python functions in a global namespace
When we need to generate a value for a variable or some other use, this can be
quickly done in recipes (.bb) and classes (.bbclass) using code similar to the
following:

--- Page 103 ---
Figure 8.26 – A code e xample to handle variable values in Python code
Usually, we need to access the BitBake datastore when writing a Python
function. Therefore, a convention among all metadata is the use of an argument
called d to point to BitBake’s datastore. It is usually in the last parameter of the
function.
In Figure 8.26, we ask the datastore for the value of the SOMECONDITION variable in
line 2 and return a value depending on it.
The example results in the value for the DEPENDS variable containing
dependencyWithConditon.
The inheritance system
The inherit directive specifies which classes of functionality our recipe (.bb)
offers a rudimentary inheritance mechanism, such as object-oriented
programming languages. For example, we can abstract the tasks involved in
using the Autoconf and Automake building tools and put them into the class for
our recipes to reuse. A given .bbclass is located by searching for
classes/filename.bbclass in BBPATH. So, in a recipe that uses Autoconf or Automake,
we can use the following:
Figure 8.27 – An e xample of how to inherit a class
Line 1 from Figure 8.27 instructs BitBake to use inherit autotools.bbclass,
providing the default tasks that work fine for most Autoconf- or Automake-
based projects.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned in detail about the BitBake metadata syntax, its
operators to manipulate variable contents, and variable expansions, including
some usage examples.

--- Page 104 ---
In the next chapter, we will learn how to use Poky to create external
compilation tools and produce a root filesystem suitable for target development.

--- Page 105 ---
9
Developing with the Yocto Project
So far in this book, we have used Poky as a build tool. In other words, we have
used it as a tool to design and generate the image delivered to products.
In this chapter, we will see how to set up a development environment for use
inside the target and meet the Standard SDK and Extensible SDK tools,
which can help us develop applications outside the target. For example, they
allow us to cross-compile applications, recipes, and images.
What is a software development kit?
In embedded development, the toolchain is often composed of cross-platform
tools or tools executed on one architecture, which then produces a binary for
use in another architecture – for example, a GCC tool that runs on an x86-64-
compatible machine and generates binaries for an ARM machine is a cross-
compiler. When a tool and the resulting binaries rely on dependencies from the
same host on which the tool runs, this is commonly called a native build. Build
and target architectures may be the same, but it is cross-compilation if the
target binary uses a staged root filesystem to find its dependencies.
A software development kit (SDK) is a set of tools and files to develop and
debug applications. These tools include compilers, linkers, debuggers, external
libraries, headers, and binaries, also called a toolchain. It may also include
extra utilities and applications. We can have two types of SDK:
Cross-development SDKs : These have the goal of being used in the development host to generate
binaries for the target
Native SDKs : These aim to run on the target device
Generating a native SDK for on-device
development
Some embedded devices are powerful enough to be used as a development
environment. However, the resources needed for the build vary significantly
from one library or application to another, so using the target as the building

--- Page 106 ---
environment may not always be viable. The development image needs the
following:
The header files and libraries
The toolchain
The following line adds these properties to an image:
Figure 9.1 – How to conﬁgur e an image to include development artifacts
IMAGE_FEATURES in the preceding example extends the image functionality as
follows:
dev-pkgs : Installs development packages (headers and extra library links) for all packages installed in
a given image
tools-sdk : Installs the toolchain that runs on the device
The IMAGE_FEATURES variable is described in more detail in Chapter 12, Creating
Custom Layers.
TIP
If we want to modify only build/conf/local.conf , the variable we should use is EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES .
The target can use this image during the application development cycle and
share the image among all developers working on the same project. Each
developer will have a copy, and the development team will use the same
development environment consistently.
Understanding the types of cross-development
SDKs
The Yocto Project can generate two types of cross-development SDKs that aim
to cover different needs. They are defined as follows:
Standard SDK : This provides the artifacts for application development, be it for bootloader or Linux
kernel development, or some other user space software
Extensible SDK : This allows the installation of extra packages inside the SDK’s sysroot  directory, as
well as recipe and application integration inside a Yocto Project-controlled environment
The Standard SDK includes a toolchain and debugging applications. Its goal is
to allow users to generate binaries for use in the target. The Extensible SDK is

--- Page 107 ---
more powerful and can build images and recipes. A notable difference between
the two types of SDK is the presence of devtool in the Extensible SDK.
devtool is responsible for providing the additional features of the Extensible
SDK. It is an interface for using BitBake and recipetool’s power. The devtool and
recipetool commands are also available in the traditional Yocto Project
environment.
Using the Standard SDK
Usually, an SDK has a set of libraries and applications it must provide, which is
defined in an image tailored to the product. These are called image-based
SDKs. For example, we can generate the Standard SDK for core-image-full-cmdline
with the following command:
Figure 9.2 – How to generate the Standar d SDK for cor e-image-full-cmdline
Another option is to create a generic SDK with the toolchain and debugging
tools. This generic SDK is called meta-toolchain and is used mainly for Linux
kernel and bootloader development and their debugging processes. It may not
be sufficient to build applications with complex dependencies. To create meta-
toolchain, use the following command:
Figure 9.3 – How to generate a generic SDK
In both cases, the resulting SDK self-installer files are at build/tmp/deploy/sdk/.
Considering we used the Standard SDK for core-image-full-cmdline, we can see the
following resulting set of files:
Figure 9.4 – The r esultant ﬁles af ter running bitbak e cor e-image-full-cmdline -c populate_sdk

--- Page 108 ---
The next step after creating the Standard SDK is to install it, as the Standard
SDK is wrapped in an installation script that can be executed in the same
manner as any other script. The following sequence shows the Standard SDK
installation process using the standard target directory:
Figure 9.5 – The Standar d SDK installation pr ocess
The preceding Standard SDK illustrates how we can generate and install a
Standard SDK. Still, it is not ideal to use a standard image that is not tailored to
your current needs. Therefore, creating a custom image that fits our
application needs is highly recommended. It is also recommended to base the
Standard SDK on this custom image.
The Standard SDK is generated to match the machine architecture we set using
the MACHINE variable. To use the Standard SDK to build a custom application, for
example, hello-world.c, we can use the following lines, targeting the x86-64
architecture:
Figure 9.6 – The steps to build a C application using the Standar d SDK
Another very commonly used project is the Linux kernel. When we want to
build the Linux kernel source code, we can use the following sequence of
commands:

--- Page 109 ---
Figure 9.7 – The steps to build the Linux k ernel using the Standar d SDK
unset LDFLAGS is required to avoid using GCC for linking, which is the Yocto
Project-based Standard SDK’s default.
Using the Extensible SDK
The Extensible SDK expands the functionalities of the Standard SDK. Some of
the significant capabilities included are as follows:
Generate recipes
Build recipes
Build images
Install packages in the internal toolchain
Deploy packages to the target
Those additional features are provided by the devtool utility, which is also
available in the standard Yocto Project environment.
To generate the Extensible SDK, use the following command:
Figure 9.8 – Command to generate the Extensible SDK
The resulting files are in build/tmp/deploy/sdk/. Considering we used the
Extensible SDK for core-image-full-cmdline, we see the following set of files:
Figure 9.9 – The r esultant ﬁles af ter running bitbak e cor e-image-full-cmdline -c populate_sdk_e xt

--- Page 110 ---
The next step after creating the Extensible SDK is to install it. To install it, we
can execute the generated script. The following sequence shows the Extensible
SDK installation process using the standard target directory:
Figure 9.10 – The Extensible SDK installation pr ocess
The preceding screenshot illustrates how we can generate and install an
Extensible SDK. Still, it is not ideal to use a standard image that is not tailored
to your current needs. Therefore, creating a custom image that fits your
application needs is highly recommended, as is basing the Extensible SDK on
one. However, we can build and install any extra dependencies into the SDK
using the Extensible SDK.
In our case, we installed the Extensible SDK in /home/user/poky_sdk. After the
installation has been completed, the next step is to use the provided script to
export the required environment variables, which enables the Extensible SDK’s
use, with the following command:
Figure 9.11 – Exporting the envir onment variables to allow the Extensible SDK to be used
In the following sections, we will cover some use cases using devtool. All
commands are executed inside a terminal with the Extensible SDK variables
exported.
The Extensible SDK is a different way to deliver the same Yocto Project tools
and metadata. It wraps together the following:

--- Page 111 ---
A basic set of binaries for the Yocto Project environment execution
A Standard SDK for development
A shared state cache to reduce local builds
A snapshot of the Yocto Project metadata and configuration
Essentially, the Extensible SDK is a snapshot of the environment used to create
it. Therefore, all devtool commands, including those we will use in the following
sections, are available inside the Yocto Project environment.
Building an image using devtool
Let’s start by creating an image. The Extensible SDK is capable of creating any
supported image. For example, to create core-image-full-cmdline, we can use the
following command line:
Figure 9.12 – Building cor e-image-full-cmdline with devtool
After running the devtool command, the generated files can be found in
/home/user/poky_sdk/tmp/deploy/images/qemux86-64.
Running an image on QEMU
We can emulate the target hardware with QEMU using the previously built
image, core-image-full-cmdline, with the following command:

--- Page 112 ---
Figure 9.13 – Emulating with devtool and QEMU
It starts the QEMU execution and generates the boot splash, as is shown in the
following screenshot:
Figure 9.14 – The QEMU boot splash

--- Page 113 ---
Creating a recipe from an external Git repository
devtool is also capable of producing a recipe from an external Git repository.
Here, we are going to use https://github.com/OSSystems/bbexample:
Figure 9.15 – Cr eating the r ecipe using devtool
devtool creates a basic recipe file for the given repository. It creates a
workspace with the package source code and the needed metadata. The file
structure used by devtool, after the devtool add https://github.com/OSSystems/bbexample
command is run, is as follows:

--- Page 114 ---
Figure 9.16 – The ﬁle structur e created by devtool when cr eating a r ecipe
Currently, devtool generates a tentative recipe for projects based on the
following:
Autotools (autoconf  and automake )
CMake
Scons
qmake
A plain Makefile
The Node.js module
Python modules that use setuptools  or distutils
Building a recipe using devtool
Now that the recipe has been created under the workspace directory, we can
build it with the following command:

--- Page 115 ---
Figure 9.17 – Building a r ecipe with devtool
Deploying to the target using devtool
After building the package with devtool, we can deploy it to the target. In our
example, the target is the running QEMU. To access it, use the default QEMU
IP address, 192.168.7.2, as shown in the following command:
Figure 9.18 – Deploying to the tar get using devtool
The application is installed in the target. We can see bbexample being executed in
the QEMU target, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 9.19 – bbe xample e xecuting on the tar get
Extending the SDK
One of the goals of the Extensible SDK is to allow us to install different recipes
in the SDK environment. For example, to have libusb1 available, we can run the
following command:


--- Page 117 ---
Figure 9.20 – The installation of a new r ecipe in the Extensible SDK
TIP
The Y octo Project Extensible SDK allows for distributed development, as developers can update and extend
the existing SDK environment during a project’s lifetime. There is some infrastructure setup required for
the proper use of the Extensible SDK as a sstate-cache  mirror and Extensible SDK server , which requires a
complex conﬁguration beyond the scope of this book. For more details, please refer to the Providing
Updates to the Extensible SDK After Installation  section of Yocto Project Application Development and the
Extensible Software Development Kit ( eSDK)  (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/sdk-manual/appendix-
customizing.html#providing-updates-to-the-extensible-sdk-after -installation ).
Summary
In this chapter, we learned that the Yocto Project can be used for development
and image creation. We learned how to create different types of toolchains and
also how to use them.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we can configure Poky to help us in the
debugging process, how we can configure our system to provide the required
tools for remote debugging using GDB, and how we can track our changes
using buildhistory.

--- Page 118 ---
10
Debugging with the Yocto Project
The debug process is an essential step in every development cycle. In this
chapter, we will learn how to configure Poky to help us with the debugging
process; for example, how we can configure our system to provide the tools
needed for a remote debug using the Gnu DeBugger (GDB), how we can track
our changes using buildhistory, and how we can use handy debug tools, such as
oe-pkgdata-util, bitbake-getvar, and devshell.
Differentiating metadata and application
debugging
Before we delve into the details of debugging, we need to realize that there are
different types of debugging, such as metadata and runtime code debugging.
Metadata debugging is needed to ensure that the behavior of BitBake’s tasks
aligns with our goals and to identify the culprit when it’s not aligned. For
example, a recipe may need to be fixed to enable a feature. In such a case, we
can use several log files generated by BitBake in the host to help trace the
execution path of the involved task.
On the other hand, debugging runtime code is more natural as it is essentially
the same as the typical development cycle of an application, a library, or a
kernel. Depending on the issue we are seeking to resolve, the right tool to help
may vary from a debugger to code instrumentation (for example, adding debug
prints).
Tracking image, package, and SDK contents
The easiest way to ensure we have the image, packages, and software
development kit (SDK), along with the expected contents, is to use the
buildhistory mechanism.
When a recipe is updated for a new version or has its code changed, it may
influence the contents of the generated packages and, consequently, the image

--- Page 119 ---
or SDK.
Poky deals with many recipes and images or SDKs frequently have tens or
hundreds of packages. Therefore, it may be challenging to track the package
contents. The Poky tool that helps in this task is buildhistory.
buildhistory, as the name suggests, keeps a history of the contents of several
artifacts built during the use of Poky. It tracks package, image, and SDK
building and their contents.
To enable buildhistory in our system, we need to add the following lines of code
in our build/conf/local.conf file:
Figure 10.1 – How to enable buildhistory support
The INHERIT method includes the buildhistory class hooks in the building process.
At the same time, the BUILDHISTORY_COMMIT line enables BitBake to create a new Git
commit in the buildhistory repository for every new package, image, or SDK
build. The Git commit makes tracking as simple as using git diff between two
commits. The data is stored under the build/buildhistory directory as text files for
ease of use.
Poky provides a utility that outputs the difference between two buildhistory
states, called buildhistory-diff, in a more concise way, which is very useful when
checking for changes. The buildhistory-diff utility outputs the difference
between any two Git revisions more meaningfully.
For example, suppose we add the strace package in the core-image-minimal image
and build it. In that case, the buildhistory-diff command can be used to check
the resultant changes, as in the following screenshot:
Figure 10.2 – The r esult of buildhistory -diﬀ

--- Page 120 ---
For every package build, buildhistory creates a list of generated sub-packages,
installation scripts, a list of file ownership and sizes, the dependency relation,
and more. In addition, the dependency relationship between the packages,
filesystem files, and dependency graph is created for images and SDKs.
To better understand the capabilities and features provided by buildhistory,
refer to Maintaining Build Output Quality in Yocto Project Development Tasks
Manual (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/common-
tasks.html#maintaining-build-output-quality).
Debugging packaging
In more sophisticated recipes, we split the installed contents into several sub-
packages. The sub-packages can be optional features, modules, or any other set
of files that is optional to install.
To inspect how the recipe’s content has been split, we can use the
build/tmp/work/<arch>/<recipe name>/<software version>/packages-split directory. It
contains a sub-directory for every sub-package and has its contents in the sub-
tree.
Among the possible reasons for a mistaken content split, we have defined the
following:
The contents not being installed (for example, an error in installation scripts)
An application or library configuration error (for example, a disabled feature)
Metadata errors (for example, the wrong package order)
Another common issue for build failure is lacking the required artifacts in the
sysroot directory (for example, headers or dynamic libraries). The counterpart of
the sysroot generation can be seen at
build/tmp/work/<arch>/<recipe_name>/<software_version>/sysroot-destdir.
If this is not enough, we can instrument the task code with these logging
functions to determine the logical error or bug that has caused the unexpected
result.
Inspecting packages

--- Page 121 ---
A central aspect of the Yocto Project is dealing with the packages. Therefore,
the project has designed oe-pkgdata-util to help us to inspect the built packages
and related data. For example, after running bitbake bluez5, we can use the
following command to find all the packages related to bluez:
Figure 10.3 – Listing all the available pack ages and ﬁltering those r elated with bluez
Sometimes, we need to find the package that includes this specific file. We can
inquire about the packages database using the following command:
Figure 10.4 – F inding which pack age pr ovides /usr/bin/rfcomm
Another use case is when we need to find out the current version of a package.
This can be done with the following command:
Figure 10.5 – Listing the pack age info for bluez5
We can also list all the files for the given package using the following
command:

--- Page 122 ---
Figure 10.6 – Listing the ﬁles fr om the bluez5 pack age
The oe-pkgdata-util script is a handy tool to help us debug packaging.

--- Page 123 ---
Logging information during task execution
The logging utilities provided by BitBake are handy for tracing the code
execution path. BitBake provides logging functions for use in Python and Shell
Script code, described as follows:
Python : For use within Python functions, BitBake supports several log levels such as bb.fatal ,
bb.error , bb.warn , bb.note , bb.plain , and bb.debug .
Shell Script : For use in Shell Script functions, the same set of log levels exists and is accessed with a
similar syntax: bbfatal , bberror , bbwarn , bbnote , bbplain , and bbdebug .
These logging functions are very similar to each other but have minor
differences, described as follows:
bb.fatal  and bbfatal : These have the highest priority for logging messages as they print the
message and terminate the processing. They cause the build to be interrupted.
bb.error  and bberror : These display an error but do not force the build to stop.
bb.warn  and bbwarn : These warn the users about something.
bb.note  and bbnote : These add a note to the user. They are only informative.
bb.plain  and bbplain : These output a message.
bb.debug  and bbdebug : These add debugging information that is shown depending on the debug level
used.
There is one subtle difference between using the logging functions in Python
and Shell Script. The logging functions in Python are directly handled by
BitBake, seen on the console, and stored in the execution log inside
build/tmp/log/cooker/<machine>. When the logging functions are used in Shell Script,
the information is outputted to an individual task log file, which is available in
build/tmp/work/<arch>/<recipe name>/<software version>/temp.
Inside the temp directory, we can inspect the scripts for every task with the run.
<task>.<pid> pattern and use the log.<task>.<pid> pattern for its output. Symbolic
links point to the last log files using the log.<task> pattern. For example, we can
check for log.do_compile to verify whether the right files were used during the
build process.
The build/tmp/work directory is detailed in Chapter 6, Detailing the Temporary
Build Directory.
Debugging metadata variables

--- Page 124 ---
To debug the metadata variables, we can use the bitbake-getvar script. It uses the
BitBake internal data to get a specific variable value and its attribution history.
For example, to inspect the PACKAGECONFIG variable for the procps recipe, we can
use the following command:
Figure 10.7 – The r esult of bitbak e-getvar -r pr ocps P ACKAGECONFIG
From Figure 10.7, we can see that PACKAGECONFIG at the end is empty. We can also
see that defaultval was set to "${@bb.utils.filter('DISTRO_FEATURES', 'systemd', d)}" at
line 33 from the meta/recipes-extended/procps/procps_3.3.17.bb file.
We can see the procps recipe lines 33 and 34 in the following screenshot:
Figure 10.8 - The pr ocps r ecipe 33 and 34 lines
The bitbake-getvar script can be used to check whether a feature is enabled or to
be sure a variable has been expanded as we expect.
Utilizing a development shell
A development shell can be a helpful tool when editing packages or debugging
build failures. The following steps take place when we use devshell:
1. Source files are extracted into the working directory.
2. Patches are applied.
3. A new terminal is opened in the working directory.
All the environment variables needed for the build are available in the new
terminal, so we can use commands such as configure and make. The commands

--- Page 125 ---
execute just as if the build system were running them.
The following command is an example that uses devshell on a target named
linux-yocto:
Figure 10.9 – R unning devshell for the linux- yocto r ecipe
The command from Figure 10.9 allows us to rework the Linux kernel source
code, build it, and change its code as needed. In Figure 10.10, you can see the
log after executing the bitbake linux-yocto -c devshell command:
Figure 10.10 – The log for bitbak e linux- yocto -c devshell
NOTE
It is crucial to remember that changes made inside devshell  do not persist between builds; thus, we must
be careful to record any critical change before leaving it.
Since we have the source at our disposal, we can use it to generate extra
patches. A convenient way of doing that is using Git and git format-patch to
create the patch to be included in the recipe afterward.
The following screenshot shows the devshell window open after calling the
devshell task:

--- Page 126 ---
Figure 10.11 – The list of ﬁles inside the WORKDIR dir ectory
The devshell command is convenient for small tasks. But when a more involved
change is needed, using an external toolchain or devtool might be a better
option.
To include the generated patch in the recipe and make it persistent, see
Chapter 13, Customizing Existing Recipes.
Using the GNU Debugger for debugging
While developing any project, from time to time, we end up struggling to
understand subtle bugs. The GDB is available as a package in Poky. It is
installed in SDK images by default, as was detailed in Chapter 9, Developing
with the Yocto Project.
NOTE
To install debugging packages containing the debug symbols and tools in an image, add IMAGE_FEATURES
+= "dbg-pkgs tools-debug"  in build/conf/local.conf .
Using the SDK or an image with the debugging packages and tools installed
allows us to debug applications directly in the target, replicating the same
development workflow we usually do on our machine.
The GDB may not be usable on some targets because of memory or disk space
constraints. The main reason for this limitation is that the GDB needs to load
the debugging information and the binaries of the debugging process before
starting the debugging process.
To overcome these constraints, we can use gdbserver, included by default when
using tools-debug in IMAGE_FEATURES. It runs on the target and doesn’t load any
debugging information from the debugged process. Instead, a GDB instance
processes the debugging information on the build host. The host GDB sends
control commands to gdbserver to control the debugged application, so the target
does not need to have the debugging symbols installed.

--- Page 127 ---
However, we must ensure the host can access the binaries with their
debugging information. Therefore, it is recommended that the target binaries
are compiled with no optimization to facilitate the debugging process.
The process for using gdbserver and adequately configuring the host and target
is detailed in the Debugging With the GNU Project Debugger (GDB) Remotely
section in Yocto Project Development Tasks Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/common-
tasks.html#debugging-with-the-gnu-project-debugger-gdb-remotely).
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to configure Poky to help us with the
debugging process. We learned about the contents of deployed directories that
can be used for debugging and how we can track our changes using buildhistory.
We also covered the use of oe-pkgdata-util to inspect package information, use
bitbake-getvar to debug variable expansion, how we can use devshell to emulate
the same build environment found by BitBake, and how we configure our
system to provide the tools needed for GDB debugging.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to expand the Poky source code using
external layers. First, we will introduce the concept of layering. Then, we will
learn in detail about the directory structure and the content of each layer type.

--- Page 128 ---
11
Exploring External Layers
One of the most charming features of Poky is the flexibility of using external
layers. In this chapter, we will examine why this is a vital capability and how we
can take advantage of it. We will also look at the different types of layers and
their directory trees layout. Finally, at the end of this chapter, we will learn to
include a new layer in our project.
Powering flexibility with layers
Poky contains metadata spread over configuration definition files such as
machine and distro files, classes, and recipes, covering everything from simple
applications to full graphical stacks and frameworks. There are multiple places
that BitBake can load metadata collection from, which are known as metadata
layers.
The biggest strength of using layers is the ability to split metadata into logical
units, which enables users to pick only the metadata collection needed for a
project.
Using metadata layers enables us to do the following:
Improve code reuse
Share and scale work across different teams, communities, and vendors
Increase the Yocto Project community’s code quality, as multiple developers and users focus together
on a particular metadata layer that is of interest to them
We can configure the system for different reasons, such as the need to
enable/disable a feature or change build flags to enable architecture-specific
optimizations. These are examples of customizations that can be done using
layers.
In addition, we should organize metadata in different layers instead of creating
our custom project environment, changing recipes, and modifying files in the
Poky layer. The more separated an organization is, the easier it is to reuse the
layers in future projects, as the Poky source code is split into different layers as

--- Page 129 ---
well. It contains three layers by default, as we can see in the output of the
following command line:
Figure 11.1 – The r esult of bitbak e-layers show-layers
The command-line output shows the following three essential properties of any
layer:
Name : This usually starts with the meta  string.
Path: This is important when we want to add a layer in our project that is appended to the BBPATH
variable.
Priority : This is the value used by BitBake to decide which recipe to use and the order in which the
.bbappend  files should be concatenated. It means that if two layers include the same recipe file (.bb),
the one with the highest priority is used. In the case of .bbappend , every .bbappend  file is included in
the original recipe. The layer priority determines the order of inclusion, so the .bbappend  files within
the highest priority layers are appended first, followed by the others.
Taking Poky as an example, it has three central individual layers. The meta-yocto-
bsp layer is the Poky reference Board Support Package (BSP) layer. It
contains machine configuration files and recipes to configure packages for the
machines. As it is a reference BSP layer, it can be used as an example.
The meta-poky layer is the Poky reference distribution layer. It contains a
distribution configuration used in Yocto Project by default. This default
distribution is described in the poky.conf file, and it is widely used for testing
products. It can be used as a starting point when designing your own
distribution.
Another kind of layer is the software layer, which includes only applications or
configuration files for applications and can be used on any architecture. There
is a massive list of software layers. To name only a few, we have meta-java, meta-
qt5, and meta-browser. The meta-java layer provides Java runtime and SDK support,
the meta-qt5 layer includes Qt5 support, and meta-browser supports web browsers
such as Firefox and Chrome.

--- Page 130 ---
The meta layer is the OpenEmbedded Core metadata, which contains the
recipes, classes, and the QEMU machine configuration files. It can be
considered a mixed layer type, as it has software collection, BSP definition, and
the distribution used by Yocto Project as the baseline.
Sometimes, your product may have special requirements, and changes in the
build/conf/local.conf file will need to be made as required. The most adequate
and maintainable solution is to create a distribution layer to place the
distribution definition file.
TIP
The build/conf/local.conf  ﬁle is a volatile ﬁle that is not supposed to be tracked by Git.
We should not rely on it to set package versions, providers, and the system features for products but use it
instead just as a shortcut for testing purposes during development.
Avoiding adding custom settings in build/conf/local.conf helps to make our builds
reproducible afterward.
Detailing a layer’s source code
Usually, a layer has a directory tree, as shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 11.2 – The standar d layer layout
Inside this directory are two files, <layer>/COPYING and <layer>/README, a license and
a message to a user respectively. In <layer>/README, we must specify any other
dependency and information that the layer’s users need to know. The meta-
prefix for the layer is not a requirement but a commonly used naming
convention.
The classes folder should hold the classes specific to that layer (the .bbclass
files). It is an optional directory.
The <layer>/conf folder is mandatory and should provide the configuration files
(the .conf files). The layer configuration file, <layer>/conf/layer.conf, which will be

--- Page 131 ---
covered in detail in the next chapter, is the file with the layer definition.
An example of the directory layout of the <layer>/conf folder is shown in Figure
11.2, where (a) shows the structure for a BSP layer and (b) shows the
structure for a distribution layer:
Figure 11.3 – The <layer>/conf layout for B SP and distribution layers
The recipe-* folder is a cluster of recipes separated by category – for example,
recipes-core, recipes-bsp, recipes-graphic, recipes-multimedia, and recipes-kernel. Inside
each folder, starting with the recipes- prefix, there is a directory with the recipe
name or a group of recipes. Inside it, the recipe files are placed, whose names
end with .bb or .bbappend. For example, we can find the following screenshot
from meta layer:
Figure 11.4 – An e xample of the r ecipes-* layout
Adding meta layers
We can find the most of available meta layers at
http://layers.openembedded.org. There are hundreds of meta layers from the

--- Page 132 ---
Yocto Project, OpenEmbedded, communities, and companies that can be
manually cloned inside the project source directory.
To include, for example, meta-oe (one of the several meta layers inside the meta-
openembedded repository) in our project, we can change the content of the
configuration files or use BitBake command lines. However, we first need to
fetch the layer’s source code. Run the following command from your Poky
source directory:
Figure 11.5 – Cloning the meta- openembedded layer
We need to modify the build/conf/bblayer.conf file to add the layer location, using
its absolute path. See line 12 in Figure 11.6 as follows:
Figure 11.6 – The content of build/conf/bblayers.conf af ter including the meta- openembedded layer
Alternatively, we can use the bitbake-layers tool to perform the inclusion for us.
This can be done using the following command from the build directory:
Figure 11.7 – The command line to add the layer location
The Yocto Project layer ecosystem
It is convenient to create a layer. To make all the available layers easier to
access, the OpenEmbedded community has developed an index, available at
http://layers.openembedded.org, where most of them can be found. An example
of its Layers tab is shown as follows:

--- Page 133 ---
Figure 11.8 – The OpenEmbedded Layer Inde x for Kirkstone
Another convenient use case for the OpenEmbedded Layer Index website is to
search for a specific software type or recipe. The OpenEmbedded Layer Index
can save the day by allowing us to search for the following:
Machines
Distributions
Layers
Recipes
Classes
The bitbake-layers tool also supports the use of the OpenEmbedded Layer Index.
For example, to add the meta-oe layer, we can use the following command:

--- Page 134 ---
Figure 11.9 – F etching a layer fr om the OpenEmbedded Layer inde x
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced the concept of layering. We learned about the
directory structure in detail and the content in each layer type. In addition, we
saw how to add an external layer to our project manually or by using the
BitBake command line, as well as how to use the OpenEmbedded Layer index
to find the available layers we need easily.
In the next chapter, we will learn more about why we need to create new layers
and what the common metadata included in them is (such as machine definition
files, recipes, and images). We will wrap it all up with an example of
distribution customization.

--- Page 135 ---
12
Creating Custom Layers
In addition to using existing layers from the community or vendors, we will
learn how to create layers for our products in this chapter. Additionally, we will
discover how to create a machine definition and distribution and profit from
them to organize our source code better.
Making a new layer
Before creating our layer, it’s always a good idea to check whether a similar
one is already available at the following website:
http://layers.openembedded.org.
If we are still looking for a layer suitable for our needs, the next step is to
create the directory. Usually, the layer name starts with meta-, but this is not a
technical restriction.
The <layer>/conf/layer.conf file is the layer configuration file required for every
layer. The new layer can be created with a tool called bitbake-layers from
BitBake, provided in Poky, as shown in the following command:
Figure 12.1 – Cr eating a new layer using bitbak e-layers
After creating the layer, we need to include it in the build/conf/bblayers.conf file
using the following command:
Figure 12.2 – A dding meta-newlayer to build/conf/bblayers.conf
TIP
The bitbake-layers  tool, by default, generates  the layer with layer priority 6. We can still customize the
priority using parameters.
The last command generates the layer, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 136 ---
Figure 12.3 – The meta-newlayer layout when cr eated
The default layer configuration file for meta-newlayer is the minimal configuration
to get the layer working. However, it can be customized to include
configurations required in the future.
The following figure shows the content of default conf/layer.conf for the meta-
newlayer layer we just created:
Figure 12.4 – The meta-newlayer/conf/layer .conf minimal conﬁguration
Some commonly used variables that may need to be added or changed are
LAYERVERSION and LAYERDEPENDS. Those are useful if our layer requires other layers to
work. Both variables’ names must be suffixed with the layer’s name, as follows:
LAYERVERSION : This is an optional variable that specifies the version of the layer in a single number.
This variable is used within the LAYERDEPENDS  variable to depend on a specific layer version – for
example, LAYERVERSION_meta-newlayer = " 1".
LAYERDEPENDS : This lists the layers that the recipes depend upon, separated by spaces – for example,
we add the dependency for version 2 of meta-otherlayer  with LAYERDEPENDS_meta-newlayer +=
"meta-otherlayer:2" .

--- Page 137 ---
An error is incurred if a dependency cannot be satisfied or the version numbers
do not match. The base of the layer structure is now created. In the following
sections, we will learn how to extend it.
Adding metadata to the layer
Layer metadata can serve two goals – add new software, or feature and modify
existing metadata.
We can include several metadata files on a new layer, such as recipes, images,
and bbappend files. There are several examples of bbappend files on meta-yocto-bsp
and meta-yocto. We will explore some of their common uses in Chapter 13,
Customizing Existing Recipes.
In the next sections, we will go through some common modifications to layer
metadata.
Creating an image
Image files are, in essence, a set of packages grouped for a purpose and
configured in a controlled way. We can create an image from scratch or create
one by reusing an existing one and adding the extra necessary packages.
We should reuse an existing image when possible, making code maintenance
more manageable and highlighting the functional differences. For example, we
may want to include an application and remove an image feature from the core-
image-full-cmdline image file. In that case, we can create an image in the recipes-
mine/images/my-image-full-cmdline.bb file with the following lines of code:
Figure 12.5 – The content of my -image-full-cmdline.bb
The core-image class provides image features that offer helpful building blocks of
commonly used functionality and should be used when creating an image from
scratch. For example, we can create an image in the recipes-mine/images/my-image-
strace.bb file consisting of the following lines of code:

--- Page 138 ---
Figure 12.6 – The content of my -image-strace.bb
TIP
The list appending operator ( +=) guarantees that a new EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES  variable can be added by
build/conf/local.conf .
CORE_IMAGE_EXTRA_INSTALL is the variable we should use to include extra packages in
the image when we inherit the core-image class, which facilitates image creation.
The class adds support for the IMAGE_FEATURES variable, which avoids duplication
of code.
Currently, the following image features are supported, as detailed in the Image
Features section of the Yocto Project Reference Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/features.html#image-features):
allow-empty-password : Allows Dropbear and OpenSSH to accept logins from accounts that have an
empty password string.
allow-root-login : Allows Dropbear and OpenSSH to accept root  logins.
dbg-pkgs : Installs debug symbol packages for all packages installed in a given image.
debug-tweaks : Makes an image suitable for development (for example, allows root logins, logins
without passwords – including root ones, and enables post-installation logging).
dev-pkgs : Installs development packages (headers and extra library links) for all packages installed in
a given image.
doc-pkgs : Installs documentation packages for all packages installed in a given image.
empty-root-password : This feature, or debug-tweaks , is required if you want to allow root login with
an empty password.
hwcodecs : Installs hardware acceleration codecs.
lic-pkgs : Installs license packages for all packages installed in a given image.
nfs-server : Installs an NFS server.
overlayfs-etc : Configures the /etc  directory to be in overlayfs . This allows you to store device-
specific information elsewhere, especially if the root filesystem is configured as read-only.
package-management : Installs package management tools and preserves the package manager
database.
perf : Installs profiling tools such as perf , systemtap , and LTTng.
post-install-logging : Enables you to log postinstall script runs in the /var/log/postinstall.log
file on the first boot of the image on the target system.

--- Page 139 ---
ptest-pkgs : Installs ptest  packages for all ptest-enabled recipes.
read-only-rootfs : Creates an image whose root filesystem is read-only.
read-only-rootfs-delayed-postinsts : When specified in conjunction with read-only-rootfs , it
specifies that post-install scripts are still permitted.
serial-autologin-root : When specified in conjunction with empty-root-password , it will
automatically login as root  on the serial console.
splash : Enables you to show a splash screen during boot. By default, this screen is provided by
psplash , which does allow customization.
ssh-server-dropbear : Installs the Dropbear minimal SSH server.
ssh-server-openssh : Installs the OpenSSH SSH server, which is more full-featured than Dropbear.
Note that if both the OpenSSH SSH server and the Dropbear minimal SSH server are present in
IMAGE_FEATURES , then OpenSSH will take precedence and Dropbear will not be installed.
stateless-rootfs : Specifies that an image should be created as stateless – when using systemd ,
systemctl-native  will not be run on the image, leaving the image to be populated at runtime by
systemd .
staticdev-pkgs : Installs static development packages, which are static libraries (for example, *.a
files), for all packages installed in a given image.
tools-debug : Installs debugging tools such as strace  and gdb.
tools-sdk : Installs a full SDK that runs on a device.
tools-testapps : Installs device testing tools (for example, touchscreen debugging).
weston : Installs Weston (a reference Wayland environment).
x11-base : Installs the X server with a minimal environment.
x11: Installs the X server.
x11-sato : Installs the OpenedHand Sato environment.
Adding a package recipe
Poky includes several classes that makes the process for the most common
development tools as projects abstract, based on Autotools, CMake, and Meson.
A package recipe is how we can instruct BitBake to perform the fetch, unpack,
patch, configure, compile, and install tasks on our application, kernel module, or
any software a project provides. In addition, a list of classes included in Poky
can be seen in the Classes section in the Yocto Project Reference Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/classes.html).
A straightforward recipe that executes the compile and install tasks explicitly is
provided as follows:

--- Page 140 ---
Figure 12.7 – A manually craf ted helloworld r ecipe
The do_compile and do_install code blocks provide the Shell Script command for
us to build and install the resulting binary into the destination directory,
referenced as ${D}, which aims to relocate the installation directory to a path
inside the build/tmp/work/ directory. Suppose that we are working on an
Autotools-based project. If so, we can avoid a lot of code duplication by using
the autotools class in the stripped example, extracted from the recipe in the
poky/meta/recipes-core/dbus-wait/dbus-wait_git.bb file, as follows:
Figure 12.8 – The content of pok y/meta/r ecipes-cor e/dbus-wait/dbus-wait_git.bb
The simple act of inheriting the autotools class in line 19 is to provide all the
code required to do the following tasks:

--- Page 141 ---
Update the configure  script code and artifacts
Update the libtool  scripts
Run the configure  script
Run make
Run make install
The same concepts apply to other building tools, as is the case for CMake and
Meson. Additionally, the number of supported classes is growing in every
release to support new build systems and avoid code duplication.
Automatically creating a base package recipe using
devtool
As we learned in the Creating a recipe from an external Git repository section
in Chapter 9, Developing with the Yocto Project, devtool automates the process
of creating a recipe based on an existing project with the following command:
Figure 12.9 – The command line to generate the r ecipe for bbe xample
Behind the scenes, devtool ran the recipetool to generate a recipe and
automatically configure all pre-built information into the new recipe file. The
end result is stored in the workspace directory, a layer maintained by devtool. To
copy the recipe file to the target layer, we can use the devtool command, as
shown here:
Figure 12.10 – The command line to deploy the bbe xample r ecipe to meta-newlayer
The created meta-newlayer/recipes-bbexample/bbexample/bbexample_git.bb file is shown in
the following snippet:

--- Page 142 ---
Figure 12.11 – The content of bbe xamle_git.bb
The devtool has created a base recipe, which should not be taken as a final
recipe. You should check for compilation options, extra metadata information,
and so on.
Adding support to a new machine definition
Even though creating a new machine definition for use in Poky is a
straightforward task, it shouldn’t be underestimated. Depending on the set of
features we need to support at the BSP layer, it can involve checking the
bootloader, kernel, and hardware support drivers.
The Yocto Project supports ARM, ARM64, x86, x86-64, PowerPC, PowerPC 64,
MIPS, MIPS64, RISC-V 32, and RISC-V 64, representing the most currently
used embedded architectures.
The prevailing set of variables used in a machine definition is as follows:
TARGET_ARCH : This sets the machine architecture – for example, ARM and x86-64
PREFERRED_PROVIDER_virtual/kernel : This overrides the default kernel (linux-yocto ) if you need to
use a specific one
SERIAL_CONSOLES : This defines serial consoles and their speeds
MACHINE_FEATURES : This describes hardware features, so the software stack required is included in
the images by default
KERNEL_IMAGETYPE : This is used to choose the kernel image type – for example, bzImage  or Image

--- Page 143 ---
IMAGE_FSTYPES : This sets the generated filesystem image types – for example, tar.gz , ext4 , and
ubifs
You can see examples of machine definition files inside the Poky source code in
the meta-yocto-bsp/conf/machine/ directory. When describing a new machine, we
should pay special attention to specific features supported by it in
MACHINE_FEATURES. This way, the software needed to help these features is installed
into the images. The values currently available for MACHINE_FEATURES are listed as
follows:
acpi : The hardware has ACPI (x86/x86-64 only)
alsa : The hardware has ALSA audio drivers
apm: The hardware uses APM (or APM emulation)
bluetooth : The hardware has integrated BT
efi: Support for booting through EFI
ext2 : The hardware HDD or microdrive
keyboard : The hardware has a keyboard
numa : The hardware has non-uniform memory access
pcbios : Support for booting through BIOS
pci: The hardware has a PCI bus
pcmcia : The hardware has PCMCIA or CompactFlash sockets
phone : Mobile phone (voice) support
qemu-usermode : QEMU can support user-mode emulation for this machine
qvga : The machine has a QVGA (320x240) display
rtc: The machine has a real-time clock
screen : The hardware has a screen
serial : The hardware has serial support (usually RS232)
touchscreen : The hardware has a touchscreen
usbgadget : The hardware is USB gadget device-capable
usbhost : The hardware is USB host-capable
vfat : FAT filesystem support
wifi : The hardware has integrated Wi-Fi
Wrapping an image for your machine
Creating a ready-to-use image for a machine should be addressed at the end of
any BSP support layer development. The type of image depends on the

--- Page 144 ---
processor, peripherals included on the board, and project restrictions.
The partitioned image is the most frequently used image for direct use in the
storage. The Yocto Project has a tool called wic, which provides a flexible way to
generate this image. It allows the creation of partitioned images based on a
template file (.wks), written in a common language that describes the target
image layout. The language definition can be found in the OpenEmbedded
Kickstart (.wks) Reference section from The Yocto Project Reference Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/kickstart.html#openembedded-
kickstart-wks-reference).
The .wks file is placed in our layer inside the wic directory. It is common to have
multiple files in this directory to specify different image layouts. However, it is
essential to remember that the chosen structure must match the machine – for
example, when considering the use of an i.MX-based machine that boots using
U-Boot from an SD card with two partitions, one for the boot files and the other
for rootfs. The respective .wks file is shown here:
Figure 12.12 – An e xample of a .wks ﬁle for an i.MX device using SPL
To enable the wic-based image generation, it is a matter of adding wic to
IMAGE_FSTYPES. We can also define the .wks file to be used by setting the WKS_FILE
variable.
Using a custom distribution
The creation of a distribution is a mix of simplicity and complexity. Creating the
distribution file is straightforward but significantly impacts Poky’s behavior.

--- Page 145 ---
Depending on our options, it may cause a binary incompatibility with previously
built binaries.
The distribution is where we define global options, such as the toolchain
version, graphical backends, and support for OpenGL. We should make a
distribution only if the default settings provided by Poky fail to fulfill our
requirements.
Usually, we intend to change a small set of options from Poky. For example, we
remove the X11 support to use a framebuffer instead. We can easily
accomplish this by reusing the Poky distribution and overriding the necessary
variables – for example, the sample distribution represented by the
<layer>/conf/distro/my-distro.conf file is as follows:
Figure 12.13 – An e xample of a custom distribution ﬁle
To use the distribution just created, we need to add the following piece of code
to the build/conf/local.conf file:
Figure 12.14 – The line to set DISTRO on build/conf/local.conf
The DISTRO_FEATURES variable may influence how the recipes are configured and
the packages are installed in images – for example, if we want to use sound in
any machine and image, the alsa features must be present. The following list
shows the present state for the DISTRO_FEATURES-supported values, as detailed in
the Distro Features section in the Yocto Project Reference Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/features.html#distro-features):
3g: Includes support for cellular data
acl: Includes Access Control List support

--- Page 146 ---
alsa : Includes Advanced Linux Sound Architecture support (OSS compatibility kernel modules are
installed if available)
api-documentation : Enables the generation of API documentation during recipe builds
bluetooth : Includes Bluetooth support (integrated BT only)
cramfs : Includes CramFS support
debuginfod : Includes support for getting ELF debugging information through a debuginfod  server
ext2 : Includes tools to support devices with an internal HDD/Microdrive for storing files (instead of
Flash-only devices)
gobject-introspection-data : Includes data to support GObject introspection
ipsec : Includes IPSec support
ipv4 : Includes IPv4 support
ipv6 : Includes IPv6 support
keyboard : Includes keyboard support
ldconfig : Includes support for ldconfig  and ld.so.conf  on the target
ld-is-gold : Uses the gold linker instead of the standard GNU linker (bfd)
lto: Enables Link-Time Optimization
multiarch : Enables you to build applications with multiple architecture support
nfc: Includes support for Near Field Communication
nfs: Includes NFS client support
nls: Includes Native Language Support  (NLS)
opengl : Includes the Open Graphics Library, a cross-language, multi-platform API, used to render
two- and three-dimensional graphics
overlayfs : Includes OverlayFS support
pam: Includes Pluggable Authentication Module  (PAM) support
pci: Includes PCI bus support
pcmcia : Includes PCMCIA/CompactFlash support
polkit : Includes Polkit support
ppp: Includes PPP dial-up support
ptest : Enables you to build the package tests that were supported by individual recipes
pulseaudio : Includes support for PulseAudio
seccomp : Enables you to build applications with seccomp  support, allowing the applications to strictly
restrict the system calls that they are allowed to invoke
selinux : Includes support for Security-Enhanced Linux  (SELinux ) (requires meta-selinux )
smbfs : Includes SMB network client support

--- Page 147 ---
systemd : Includes support for this init  manager, a full replacement for init , with parallel starting of
services, reduced shell overhead, and other features
usbgadget : Includes USB Gadget Device support
usbhost : Includes USB Host support
usrmerge : Merges the /bin , /sbin , /lib , and /lib64  directories into their respective counterparts in
the /usr  directory to provide better package and application compatibility
vfat : Includes FAT filesystem support
vulkan : Includes support for the Vulkan API
wayland : Includes the Wayland display server protocol and the library that supports it
wifi : Includes Wi-Fi support (integrated only)
x11: Includes the X server and libraries
xattr : Includes support for extended file attributes
zeroconf : Includes support for zero-configuration networking
MACHINE_FEATURES versus DISTRO_FEATURES
The DISTRO_FEATURES and MACHINE_FEATURES variables work together to provide
feasible support for the final system. When a machine supports a feature, this
does not imply that the target system supports it because the distribution must
provide its underlying base.
For example, if a machine supports Wi-Fi but the distribution does not, the
applications used by the operating system will be built with Wi-Fi support
disabled so that the outcome will be a system without Wi-Fi support. On the
other hand, if the distribution provides Wi-Fi support and a machine does not,
the modules and applications needed for the Wi-Fi will not be installed in
images built for this machine. However, the operating system and its modules
have support for Wi-Fi enabled.
Understanding the scope of a variable
The BitBake metadata has thousands of variables, but the scope where these
variables are available depends on where it is defined. There are two kinds of
variables, as follows:
Variables defined in configuration files are global to every recipe, also referred to as configuration
metadata. The parsing order of the main configuration files is shown as follows:
build/conf/local.conf

--- Page 148 ---
<layer>/conf/machines/<machine>.conf
<layer>/conf/distro/<distro>.conf
Variables defined within recipe files have recipe visibility scope that is local to the specific recipe only
during the execution of its tasks.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered how to create a new layer and metadata. First, we
saw how to create a machine configuration, a distribution definition, and recipe
files. Then, we learned how to make images and include our application in an
image.
In the next chapter, we will access some examples of the most common
customization cases used by an additional layer, such as modifying existing
packages, adding extra options to autoconf, applying a new patch, and including
a new file to a package. We will see how to configure BusyBox and linux-yocto, the
two packages commonly customized when making an embedded system.

--- Page 149 ---
13
Customizing Existing Recipes
In the course of our work with Yocto Project’s tools, it is expected that we will
need to customize existing recipes. In this chapter, we will explore some
examples, such as changing compilation options, enabling or disabling features
of a recipe, applying an extra patch, and using configuration fragments to
customize some recipes.
Understanding common use cases
Nowadays, projects usually have a set of layers to provide the required
features. We certainly need to make changes on top of them to adapt them to
our specific needs. They may be cosmetic or substantive changes, but the way
to make them is the same.
We must create a .bbappend file to change a preexisting recipe in our project
layer. For example, suppose the original recipe was named <original-
layer>/recipes-core/app/app_1.2.3.bb. When you create a .bbappend file, you can use
the % wildcard character to allow for matching recipe names. So, the .bbappend
file could have the following different forms:
App_1.2.3.bbappend : This applies the change only for the 1.2.3  version
app_1.2.%.bbappend : This applies the change only for the 1.2.y  version
app_1.%.bbappend : This applies the change only for the 1.x and 1.x.y  versions
app_%.bbappend : This applies the change for any version
We can have multiple .bbappend files, depending on the intended changes we
want to apply to the app recipe. Sometimes we can restrict the changes to one
version, but sometimes, we want to change all available recipes.
NOTE
When there is more than one .bbappend  ﬁle for a recipe, all of them are joined following the layer’s priority
order .
The .bbappend file can be seen as a text appended at the end of the original
recipe. It empowers us with a highly flexible mechanism to avoid duplicating

--- Page 150 ---
source code to apply the required changes to our project’s layers.
Extending a task
When the task content does not satisfy our requirements, we replace it
(providing our implementation) or append it. As we will learn more extensively
about the BitBake metadata syntax in Chapter 8, Diving into BitBake Metadata,
the :append and :prepend operators can extend a task with extra content. For
example, to extend a do_install task, we can use the following code:
Figure 13.1 – Example on how to e xtend the do_install task
This way, the new content is concatenated in the original task.
Adding extra options to recipes based on
Autotools
Let’s assume we have Autotools-based application, along with a preexisting
recipe for it, and we want to do the following:
Enable my-feature
Disable another-feature
The content of the .bbappend file to make the changes will be the following:
Figure 13.2 – A dding e xtra conﬁguration to the Autoconf ﬂags
The same strategy can be used if we need to enable it conditionally based on
the hardware we are building for, as follows:
Figure 13.3 – Conditionally adding e xtra conﬁguration to the Autoconf ﬂags
The Yocto Project supports many different build systems, and the variables to
configure them are shown in the following table:

--- Page 151 ---
Build System Variable
Autotools EXTRA_OECONF
Cargo EXTRA_OECARGO
CMake EXTRA_OECMAKE
Make EXTRA_OEMAKE
Meson EXTRA_OEMESON
NPM EXTRA_OENPM
SCons EXTRA_OESCONS
WAF EXTRA_OEWAF
Table 13.1 – The list of variables to conﬁgur e each build system
The variables from Table 13.1 are given as arguments for the respective build
system.
Applying a patch
For cases where we need to apply a patch to an existing package, we should
use FILESEXTRAPATHS, which includes new directories in the searching algorithm,
making the additional file visible to BitBake, as shown here:
Figure 13.4 – The content of .bbappend is used only to apply mypatch.patch
In the preceding example, THISDIR expands to the current directory, and PN and
PV expand to the package name and version, respectively. This new path is then
included in the directories list used for file searching. The prepend operator is
crucial as it guarantees that the file is picked from this directory, even if a file
with the same name is added in the lower priority layers in the future.

--- Page 152 ---
BitBake assumes that every file with a .patch or .diff extension is a patch and
applies them accordingly.
Adding extra files to the existing packages
If we need to include an additional configuration file, we should use
FILESEXTRAPATHS, as explained in the previous example and shown in the following
lines of code:
Figure 13.5 – The content of the .bbappend ﬁle to install a new conﬁguration ﬁle
The do_install:append function appends the provided block below the metadata
already available in the original do_install function. It includes the command to
copy our new configuration file into the package’s filesystem. The file is copied
from ${WORKDIR} to ${D} as these are the directories used by Poky to build the
package and the destination directory used by Poky to create the package.
There are many variables to define paths in our recipes, such as bindir, datadir,
and sysconfdir. The poky/meta/conf/bitbake.conf file defines all those commonly used
variables. The variables exist, so the installation paths of binaries can be
customized depending on the use case. For example, the native SDK binaries
require a specific installation path, so the binaries don’t conflict with the target
ones.
The following table shows the most common variables and their default
expanded values:
Variable Default Expanded Value
base_bindir /bin
base_sbindir /sbin
sysconfdir /etc

--- Page 153 ---
localstatedir /var
datadir /usr/share
bindir /usr/bin
sbindir /usr/sbin
libdir /usr/lib or /usr/lib64
libexecdir /usr/libexec
includedir /usr/include
Table 13.2 – The list of commonly used variables and their default e xpanded value
The use of hard coded paths in recipes should be avoided, so we reduce the risk
of misconfiguration. For example, when using the usrmerge DISTRO_FEATURE, behind
the scenes, all recipes set base_bindir as bindir, so if a recipe uses /bin as a hard
coded path, the installation won’t happen as expected.
Understanding file searching paths
When a file (a patch or a generic file) is included in SRC_URI, BitBake searches
for the FILESPATH and FILESEXTRAPATH variables. The default setting is to look in the
following locations:
1. <recipe>-<version>/
2. <recipe>/
3. files/
In addition to this, it also checks for OVERRIDES for a specific file to be overridden
in each folder. To illustrate this, consider the foo_1.0.bb recipe. The OVERRIDES = "
<board>:<arch>" variable for the file will be searched in the following directories,
respecting the exact order shown:
1. foo-1.0/<board>/
2. foo-1.0/<arch>/
3. foo-1.0/

--- Page 154 ---
4. foo/<board>/
5. foo/<arch>/
6. foo/
7. files/<board>/
8. files/<arch>/
9. files/
This is just illustrative as the list of OVERRIDES is huge and machine-specific. When
we work with our recipe, we can use bitbake-getvar OVERRIDES to find the complete
list of available overrides for a specific machine and use them accordingly. See
the Poky output as follows:
Figure 13.6 – Using bitbak e-getvar to get the value of the O VERRIDES variable
This command is quite useful for debugging the metadata during the debugging
process.
Changing recipe feature configuration
PACKAGECONFIG is a mechanism to simplify feature set customization for recipes. It
provides a way to enable and disable the recipe features. For example, the
recipe has the following configuration:

--- Page 155 ---
Figure 13.7 – Example of P ACKAGECONFIG
Figure 13.7 has two features: feature1 and feature2. The behavior of each feature
is defined by six arguments, separated by commas. You can omit any argument
but must retain the separating commas. The order is essential and specifies the
following:
1. Extra arguments if the feature is enabled.
2. Extra arguments if the feature is disabled.
3. Additional build dependencies (DEPENDS ) if the feature is enabled.
4. Additional runtime dependencies (RDEPENDS ) if the feature is enabled.
5. Additional runtime recommendations (RRECOMMENDS ) if the feature is enabled.
6. Any conflicting (mutually exclusive) PACKAGECONFIG  settings for this feature.
We can create a .bbappend file that expands the PACKAGECONFIG variable’s default
value to enable feature2 as well, as shown here:
Figure 13.8 – The content of a .bbappend ﬁle to e xpand the P ACKAGECONFIG variable
NOTE
To add the same feature to the build/conf/local.conf  ﬁle, we can use PACKAGECONFIG:pn-
<recipename>:append = ' feature2' .
The list of available PACKAGECONFIG features for a specific package must be
checked inside the recipe file, as there is no tool to list them all.
Configuration fragments for Kconfig-based
projects

--- Page 156 ---
The Kconfig configuration infrastructure has become popular due to its
flexibility and expressiveness. Although it started with Linux kernel, some other
projects use the same infrastructure, such as U-Boot and BusyBox.
The configuration is based on select-based features where you can enable or
disable a feature and save the result of this choice in a file for later use. So
please consider the following figure:
Figure 13.9 – Enable or disable TF TPD on BusyBo x KConﬁg
We have control whether the TFTPD support in BusyBox is enabled (a) or not
(b).
The Yocto Project provides a specialized class to handle the configuration of the
Kconfig-based project, allowing minor modifications called configuration
fragments. We can use this to enable or disable features for your machine, for
example, when configuring linux-yocto, we can use <layer>/recipes-
kernel/linux/linux-yocto_%.bbappend as in the following code:
Figure 13.10 – The .bbappend content for applying a fragment
Every configuration fragment must use the .cfg file extension. So, the content of
the <layer>/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-yocto/linux-yocto/enable-can.cfg file is shown
here:
Figure 13.11 – The content of enable-can.cfg
We can use BitBake to configure or generate the Linux kernel configuration
file. The bitbake virtual/kernel -c menuconfig command that allows us to configure
the Linux kernel can be seen in the following screenshot:

--- Page 157 ---
Figure 13.12 – Enabling CAN bus subsystem support using bitbak e virtual/k ernel -c menuconﬁg
Figure 13.12 shows how to enable CAN bus support using Linux kernel’s
menuconfig. The kernel configuration is changed when exiting and saving from
menuconfig.
The next step is to create the fragment using bitbake virtual/kernel -c diffconfig,
as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 158 ---
Figure 13.13 – The diﬀconﬁg option generates the conﬁguration fragment
Figure 13.13 displays the log after the command. It is important to note that
the fragment file is created under the <build>/tmp/work/ directory, and the
absolute path is shown in the log. We must copy this fragment file to the layer
and use it in a .bbappend file in order to get it applied.
TIP
To save a complete conﬁguration, we can use bitbake virtual/kernel -c savedefconfig . This
command generates a defconfig  ﬁle to replicate the same conﬁguration. This is a complete conﬁguration,
not a fragment ﬁle.
The support for the configuration fragments works for the following recipes:
Linux kernel
U-Boot
BusyBox
Those recipes also offer the menuconfig and diffconfig tasks.

--- Page 159 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to customize existing recipes using the .bbappend
files and benefited from this by avoiding the duplication of source code. We saw
how to enable or disable a feature, how to apply a patch, and how to use the
configuration fragment support.
In the next chapter, we will discuss how the Yocto Project can help us with
some legal aspects of producing a Linux-based system using packages under
different licenses. We will understand which artifacts we need and how Poky
can be configured to generate the artifacts that should be shared as part of the
copyleft compliance accomplishment process.

--- Page 160 ---
14
Achieving GPL Compliance
In this chapter, we will see how we can ensure open source license compliance
and use Poky to provide the artifacts needed, such as the source code, licensing
text, and the list of derivative work. This is critical for most products
introduced into the market nowadays, as open source code needs to live
alongside proprietary code.
Understanding copyleft
Copyleft is a legal way to use copyright law to maximize rights and express
freedom. However, it impacts our products. We must meet all obligations of
open source and free software licenses.
When building a Linux distribution, at least two projects are used: the Linux
kernel and a compiler. The GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) is still the most
commonly used compiler. The Linux kernel uses the General Public License
(GPL) v2 license, and the GCC uses the GPLv2, GPLv2.1, and GPLv3 licenses,
depending on the project used.
However, a Linux-based system can include virtually all projects available
worldwide, in addition to all applications made by the company for its product.
So how do we know the number of projects and licenses included, and how do
we fulfill copyleft compliance requirements?
NOTE
This chapter describes how the Y octo Project can help you in this task but be aware that you must know
exactly what you need to provide and the possible license incompatibilities. Please consult your legal
department or a copyright lawyer if you have any doubts.
In the next section, we will look at how the Yocto Project can help us with the
most common tasks required for copyleft compliance.
Understanding copyleft compliance versus
proprietary code

--- Page 161 ---
Understanding that proprietary and copyleft-covered codes can coexist in the
same product is essential. Although this is the standard for most products
available nowadays, we must be careful about the libraries we link the code to
because some may have license compatibility issues.
One Linux-based system is a set of several projects, each one under a different
license. The Yocto Project helps developers understand that most copyleft
projects have the following obligations:
The source code of the project
The license for the project
Any modification to the project
Any script that is required to configure and build
If one project under copyleft is modified, the license text, the base source code,
and any modification must be included in the final deliverable.
The assumptions cover most rights guaranteed by copyleft licenses. These are
the parts where the Yocto Project can help us. However, before releasing
anything, it is recommended that we audit all the materials to be released to
make sure they’re complete.
Managing software licensing with Poky
One important Poky feature is the ability to manage licenses. Most of the time,
we only care about our bugs. However, managing licenses and the kinds of
licenses used is crucial when creating a product.
Poky keeps track of licenses in every recipe. In addition, it has a strategy to
work with proprietary applications during the development cycle.
NOTE
An important thing to know is that a recipe is released under a speciﬁc license and represents a project
released under a diﬀerent license. Therefore, the recipe and the project are two separate entities with
speciﬁc licenses, so the two licenses must be considered part of the product.
In most recipes, information is a comment containing the copyright, license,
and author name; this information pertains to the recipe itself. Then, there is a
set of variables to describe the package license, and they are as follows:
LICENSE : This describes the license under which the package was released.

--- Page 162 ---
LIC_FILES_CHKSUM : This may not seem very useful at first sight. It describes the license file and
checksum for a particular package, and we may find much variation in how a project describes its
license. The most common license files are stored in meta/files/common-licenses/ .
Some projects include a file, such as COPYING or LICENSE, which specifies the
license for the source code. Others use a header note in each file or the main
file. The LIC_FILES_CHKSUM variable has the checksum for the license text of a
project; if any letters are changed, the checksum is changed as well. This
ensures that any change is noted and consciously accepted by the developer. A
license change may be a typo fix; however, it may also be a change in legal
obligations, so the developer needs to review and understand the difference.
When a different license checksum is detected, BitBake launches a build error
and points to the project that had its license changed. You must be careful
when this happens, as the license change may impact the use of this software.
To be able to build anything again, you must change the LIC_FILE_CHKSUM value
accordingly and update the LICENSE field to match the license change. Your legal
department should be consulted if the license terms have changed. It is also
good practice to record the reason for the change in a commit message for
future reference.
Understanding commercial licenses
By default, Poky does not use any recipe with a commercial license restriction.
In the recipe file, the LICENSE_FLAGS variable is used to identify which license
restriction that recipe has. For the gstreamer1.0-plugins-ugly recipe, the license-
related variables are from line 5 to line 10, as in Figure 14.1:
Figure 14.1 – The license-r elated variables for the gstr eamer1.0-plugins-ugly r ecipe
Line 10 indicates to Poky that this recipe requires the commercial license flag to
be explicitly accepted for the recipe to be used. To allow the use of the

--- Page 163 ---
gstreamer1.0-plugins-ugly recipe, we can use the following:
Figure 14.2 – How to accept to install the r ecipes with commer cial license r estrictions
We can add LICENSE_FLAGS_ACCEPTED in our custom distribution (e.g., <my-
layer>/conf/distro/my-distro.conf) or inside build/conf/local.conf during the initial
development stages. Using the commercial flag accepts the installation of every
recipe that requires this flag. Still, sometimes we want to manage the recipes
we use, demanding specific license terms. We can use the following form:
Figure 14.3 – How to accept to only install gstr eamer1.0-plugins-ugly
With the code from Figure 14.3 we accept only the commercial license flag from
gstreamer1.0-plugins-ugly, which is the recipe name. It is good practice to ensure
this flag is enabled for a set of recipes that you have permission to use in a
commercial setting. Please consult your legal department to ensure this.
Using Poky to achieve copyleft compliance
At this point, we know how to use Poky and understand its main goal. It is time
to understand the legal aspects of producing a Linux-based system that uses
packages under different licenses.
We can configure Poky to generate the artifacts that should be shared as part
of the copyleft compliance process.
Understanding license auditing
To help us achieve copyleft compliance, Poky generates a license manifest
during the image build, located at build/tmp/deploy/licenses/<image_name-
machine_name>-<datastamp>/.
To demonstrate this process, we will use the core-image-full-cmdline image for the
qemux86-64 machine. To start with our example, look at the files under
build/tmp/deploy/licenses/core-image-full-cmdline-qemux86-64-<datastamp>, which are as
follows:

--- Page 164 ---
image_license.manifest : This lists the recipe names, versions, licenses, and the packages files
available in build/tmp/deploy/image/<machine>  but not installed inside the root ﬁlesystem
(rootfs ). The most common examples are the bootloader, the Linux kernel image, and DTB files.
package.manifest : This lists all the packages in the image.
license.manifest : This lists the names, versions, recipe names, and licenses for all the installed
packages. This manifest may be used for copyleft compliance auditing.
Figure 14.4 – The dir ectory layout for the license manifests under build/tmp/deploy
The license manifest for each recipe is under build/tmp/deploy/licenses/<package-
name>. Figure 14.4 shows the directory layout for some packages.
Providing the source code

--- Page 165 ---
The most apparent way Poky can help us to provide the source code of every
project used in our image is by sharing the DL_DIR content. However, this
approach has one crucial pitfall – any proprietary source code will be shared
within DL_DIR if it is shared as is. In addition, this approach will share any source
code, including parts not required by copyleft compliance.
Poky must be configured to archive the source code before the final image is
created. To have it, we can add the following variables into build/conf/local.conf,
as in Figure 14.5:
Figure 14.5 – Conﬁguring P oky to pr ovide the sour ce code of pack ages under copylef t
The archiver class copies the source code, patches, and scripts for the filtered
license set. The default configuration is to have COPYLEFT_LICENSE_INCLUDE set to
"GPL* LGPL* AGPL*" so the recipes that use source code licensed on those licenses
are copied under the build/tmp/deploy/sources/<architecture> folders:
Figure 14.6 – The build/tmp/deploy/sour ces dir ectory layout
The class also supports the COPYLEFT_LICENSE_EXCLUDE variable to ensure packages
that use source code licensed on some specific licenses never go into the sources

--- Page 166 ---
directory. By default, it is set to "CLOSED Proprietary". Figure 14.6 shows some
recipe examples after baking core-image-full-cmdline.
Providing compilation scripts and source code
modifications
With the configuration provided in the previous section, Poky will package the
original source code for each project. If we want to include the patched source
code, we will only use ARCHIVER_MODE[src] = "patched"; this way, Poky will wrap the
project source code after the do_patch task. It includes modifications from
recipes or the .bbappend file.
This way, the source code and any modifications can be shared easily.
However, one kind of information still needs to be created: the procedure used
to configure and build the project.
To have a reproducible build environment, we can share the configured project,
in other words, the project after the do_configure task. We can add
ARCHIVER_MODE[src] = "configured" to build/conf/local.conf for this.
It is important to remember that we must consider that the person on the other
side may not use the Yocto Project for copyleft compliance; alternatively, if they
are using it, they must know that the modification made to the original source
code and configuration procedure is not available. This is why we share the
configured project: it allows anyone to reproduce our build environment.
For all flavors of source code, the default resulting file is a tarball; other
options will add ARCHIVER_MODE[srpm] = "1" to build/conf/local.conf, and the resulting
file will be an SRPM package.
Providing license text
When providing the source code, the license text is shared inside it. If we want
the license text inside our final image, we can add the following to
build/conf/local.conf:
Figure 14.7 – How to conﬁgur e Poky to deploy license te xt inside the ﬁnal image

--- Page 167 ---
This way, the license files will be placed inside the rootfs, under
/usr/share/common-licenses/.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how Poky can help with copyleft license compliance
and why it should not be used as a legal resource. Poky enables us to generate
source code, reproduction scripts, and license text for packages used in our
distribution. In addition, we learned that the license manifest generated within
the image might be used to audit the image.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to use the Yocto Project’s tools with real
hardware. Then, we will use the Yocto Project to generate images for a few real
boards.

--- Page 168 ---
15
Booting Our Custom Embedded Linux
It’s time! We are ready to boot our custom-made embedded Linux, as we have
learned the required concepts and gained enough knowledge about the Yocto
Project and Poky. In this chapter, we will practice what we have learned so far
about using Poky with external BSP layers to generate an image for use with
the following machines and boot it using the SD card:
BeagleBone Black
Raspberry Pi 4
VisionFive
The concepts in this chapter can be applied to every other board as long as the
vendor provides a BSP layer to use with the Yocto Project.
Discovering the right BSP layer
In Chapter 11, Exploring External Layers, we learned that the Yocto Project
allows for splitting its metadata among different layers. It organizes the
metadata so we can choose which exact meta layer to add to our project.
The way to find the BSP for a board varies, but generally, we can find it by
visiting https://layers.openembedded.org. We can search for the machine name
and the website finds which layer contains it in its database.
Reviewing aspects that impact hardware use
The boards used in this chapter are well maintained and straightforward.
However, using a different board is a valid choice, but your mileage may vary.
When we choose a board, the first step is to verify the quality of its software
support. The low-level components comprise the following:
Bootloader (such as U-Boot, GRUB, or systemd-boot)
Linux kernel (with other required drivers such as GPU or WiFi)
User space packages required by hardware acceleration

--- Page 169 ---
Those are critical but are not the only aspects to consider. The integration
inside the Yocto Project, in a BSP layer form, reduces the friction in the board
use as it usually provides the following:
A reusable disk partition layout (e.g., a WIC .wks template)
Ready-to-use machine definitions
User space packages integrated for hardware acceleration (usable out of the box)
The maturity level of software enablement, and the Yocto Project BSP,
significantly impact the friction involved in using the board and the out-of-the-
box experience when using Poky for different boards.
Taking a look at widely used BSP layers
We will see a list of widely used BSP layers in this chapter. This should not be
taken as a complete list or as a definitive one. Still, we want to facilitate your
search for the required layer in case you have one board of a specific vendor
next to you. This list is as follows, in alphabetic order:
Allwinner : This has the meta-allwinner  layer
AMD : This has the meta-amd  layer
Intel: This has the meta-intel  layer
NXP: This has the meta-freescale  and meta-freescale-3rdparty  layers
Raspberry Pi : This has the meta-raspberrypi  layer
RISC- V: This has the meta-riscv  layer
Texas Instruments : This has the meta-ti  layer
In the next sections, we start to work with the example boards.
Using physical hardware
To ease the exploration of the Yocto Project’s capabilities, it is good to have a
real board so we can enjoy the experience of booting our customized embedded
system. For this, we have tried to collect the most widely available boards so
the chances of you owning one are higher.
The next sections will cover the steps for the following boards:
BeagleBone Black : BeagleBone Black is community-based, with members worldwide. Further
information is available at https://beagleboard.org/black/.

--- Page 170 ---
Raspberry Pi 4 : The most famous ARM64-based board with the broadest community spread
worldwide. See more details at https://www.raspberrypi.org/.
VisionFive : The world’s first generation of affordable RISC-V boards designed to run Linux. See more
details at https://www.starfivetech.com/en.
All the boards listed are maintained by non-profit organizations based on
education and mentoring, which makes the community a fertile place to
discover the world of embedded Linux. The following table summarizes the
boards and their main features:
Board versionFeatures
BeagleBone
BlackTI AM335x (single-core) 512 MB RAM
Raspberry Pi 4Broadcom BCM2711 64bit CPU (quad-core) 1 GB up to 8
GB RAM
VisionFive U74 Dual-Core 8 GB RAM
Table 15.1 – The har dwar e speciﬁcation for the cover ed boar ds
In the next sections, we are going to bake and boot the Yocto Project image for
each one of the suggested machines. It’s recommended that you only read the
section for the board that you own. Make sure to consult the board’s
documentation in order to understand how to prepare the board for the
operation.
BeagleBone Black
In the next two sections, we go through the steps for baking and booting an
image for the BeagleBone Black board.
Baking for BeagleBone Black
To use this board, we can rely on the meta-yocto-bsp layer, which is included by
default in Poky. The meta layer can be accessed at
https://git.yoctoproject.org/meta-yocto/tree/meta-yocto-bsp?h=kirkstone.

--- Page 171 ---
To create the source structure, please download Poky using the following
command line:
 
git clone git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky -b kirkstone
After completing this, we must create the build directory we use for our builds.
We can do this using the following command line:
 
source oe-init-build-env build
After we have the build directory and the BSP layers properly set up, we can
start the build. Inside the build directory, we must call the following command:
 
MACHINE=beaglebone-yocto bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
The MACHINE variable can be changed depending on the board we want to use or
set in build/conf/local.conf.
Booting BeagleBone Black
After the build process is over, the image will be available inside the
build/tmp/deploy/images/beaglebone-yocto/ directory. The file we want to use is core-
image-full-cmdline-beaglebone-yocto.wic.
Make sure you point to the right device and double-check to not write on your
hard disk.
To copy the core-image-full-cmdline image to the SD card, we should use the dd
utility, as follows:
 
sudo dd if=core-image-full-cmdline-beaglebone-yocto.wic of=/dev/<media>
After copying the content to the SD card, insert it into the SD card slot, connect
the HDMI cable, and power on the machine. It should boot nicely.
NOTE
The BeagleBone Black boot sequence starts trying to boot from eMMC and only tries to boot from the SD
card in case the eMMC boot fails. Clicking the USER /BOOT  button when powering on will temporarily
change the boot order , making sure the boot is from the SD card. To further tailor these instructions for
your board, please refer to the documentation at http://www .beagleboard.org/black .
Raspberry Pi 4

--- Page 172 ---
In the next two sections, we go through the steps for baking and booting an
image for the Raspberry Pi 4 board.
Baking for Raspberry Pi 4
To add this board support to our project, we need to include the meta-raspberrypi
meta layer, which is the BSP layer with support for the Raspberry Pi boards,
including the Raspberry Pi 4, but not limited to it. The meta layer can be
accessed at http://git.yoctoproject.org/cgit.cgi/meta-raspberrypi/log/?
h=kirkstone.
To create the source structure, please download Poky using the following
command line:
 
git clone git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky -b kirkstone
After completing this, we must create the build directory we use for our builds
and add the BSP layer. We can do this using the following command lines:
 
source oe-init-build-env build  
bitbake-layers layerindex-fetch meta-raspberrypi
After we have the build directory and the BSP layers properly set up, we can
start the build. Inside the build directory, we must call the following command:
 
MACHINE=raspberrypi4 bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
The MACHINE variable can be changed depending on the board we want to use or
set in build/conf/local.conf.
Booting Raspberry Pi 4
After the build process is over, the image will be available inside the
build/tmp/deploy/images/raspberrypi4/ directory. The file we want to use is core-image-
full-cmdline-raspberrypi4.wic.bz2.
Make sure you point to the right device and double-check to not write on your
hard disk.
To copy the core-image-full-cmdline image to the SD card, we should use the dd
utility, as follows:
 
bzcat core-image-full-cmdline-raspberrypi4.wic.bz2 | sudo dd of=/dev/<media>

--- Page 173 ---
After copying the content to the SD card, insert it into the SD card slot, connect
the HDMI cable, and power on the machine. It should boot nicely.
VisionFive
In the next two sections, we go through the steps for baking and booting an
image for the VisionFive board.
Baking for VisionFive
To add this board support to our project, we need to include the meta-riscv meta
layer, which is the BSP layer with support for RISC-V-based boards, including
the VisionFive, but not limited to it. The meta layer can be accessed at
https://github.com/riscv/meta-riscv/tree/kirkstone.
To create the source structure, please download Poky using the following
command line:
 
git clone git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky -b kirkstone
After completing this, we must create the build directory we’ll use for our builds
and add the BSP layer. We can do this using the following command lines:
 
source oe-init-build-env build  
bitbake-layers layerindex-fetch meta-riscv
After we have the build directory and the BSP layers properly set up, we can
start the build. Inside the build directory, we must call the following command:
 
MACHINE=visionfive bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
The MACHINE variable can be changed depending on the board we want to use or
set in build/conf/local.conf.
Booting VisionFive
After the build process is over, the image will be available inside the
build/tmp/deploy/images/visionfive/ directory. The file we want to use is core-image-
full-cmdline-visionfive.wic.gz.
Make sure you point to the right device and double-check to not write on your
hard disk.

--- Page 174 ---
To copy the core-image-full-cmdline image to the SD card, we should use the dd
utility, as follows:
 
zcat core-image-full-cmdline-visionfive.wic.gz | sudo dd of=/dev/<media>
After copying the content to the SD card, insert it into the SD card slot, connect
the HDMI cable, and power on the machine.
NOTE 
VisionFive doesn’t have a default boot target and requires manual intervention to boot. Please use the
following commands inside the U-Boot prompt using a serial console:
setenv bootcmd “ run distro_bootcmd”
saveenv
boot
The command saveenv  is optional to make the new conﬁguration persist so that it can work out of the box
after reboot.
See how to get the serial console in the Quick Start Guide  (https://doc-
en.rvspace.org/VisionFive/Quick_Start_Guide/ ).
Taking the next steps
Phew! We got it done! Now you should know the Yocto Project build system
basics and be capable of extending your other areas of knowledge. We tried
covering the most common daily tasks using the Yocto Project. There are a few
things you might want to practice:
Creating bbappend  files to apply patches or make other changes to a recipe
Making your custom images
Changing the Linux kernel configuration file (defconfig )
Changing the BusyBox configuration and including the configuration fragments to add or remove a
feature in a layer
Adding a new recipe for a package
Making a product layer with your product-specific machines, recipes, and images
Remember, the source code is the ultimate knowledge source, so use it.
When looking for how to do something, finding a similar recipe saves you time
testing different approaches to solve the problem.
Eventually, you’ll likely see yourself in a position to fix or enhance something
on OpenEmbedded Core, a meta layer, or in a BSP. So, don’t be afraid – send

--- Page 175 ---
the patches and take the feedback and requests for changes as an opportunity
to learn and improve your way of solving a problem.
Summary
We learned how to discover the BSP for a board we want to use in our project.
We consolidated our Yocto Project knowledge by adding external BSP layers
and using these in real boards with a generated image. We also consolidated
the necessary background information to learn about any other aspect of the
Yocto Project you may need.
In the next chapter, we will explore how using QEMU speeds up product
development by enabling us to not rely on hardware for every development
cycle.

--- Page 176 ---
16
Speeding Up Product Development through
Emulation – QEMU
In this chapter, we explore the possibilities of shortening product development
through emulation and reducing the dependency on real hardware for most
development. You will come to understand the benefits of using QEMU over
hardware and when choosing real hardware is preferable. We also describe the
runqemu capabilities and demonstrate some use cases.
What is QEMU?
Quick EMUlator (QEMU) is a free, open source software tool that allows
users to run multiple architectures on the same physical machine. It is a system
emulator that can virtualize complete device hardware, including the CPU,
memory, storage, and peripherals.
Using QEMU for testing and debugging can save time and effort during
development. It allows developers to test their code in various simulated
environments.
Among other things, the Yocto Project uses QEMU to run automated Quality
Assurance (QA) tests on final images shipped with each release. Within the
context of the Yocto Project, QEMU allows you to run a complete image you
have built using the Yocto Project as another task on your build system. In
addition, QEMU helps to run and test images and applications on supported
Yocto Project architectures without having actual hardware.
What are the benefits of using QEMU over
hardware?
There are several situations where it may be more practical to use QEMU
instead of real hardware for testing and debugging:
It allows you to quickly and easily test your code in various simulated environments without
constantly deploying it to the target device
If you don’t have the hardware that the software will be running on or if its availability is limited

--- Page 177 ---
When you need to test software on multiple hardware platforms without having to set up multiple
physical machines
When you want to debug software in a controlled environment, such as reduced memory availability,
to observe its behavior
When you want to validate software that isn’t hardware specific and wish to reduce the time needed
for testing, such as flashing, board wiring, and so on
However, it is essential to note that QEMU is a software emulator, which may
not be a perfect substitute for real hardware at all times. Therefore, testing
software on real hardware may be necessary to ensure it works correctly.
When is choosing real hardware preferable?
There are several situations where it may be more practical, and even required,
to use real hardware instead of QEMU for testing and debugging, such as the
following:
When the software relies on specific hardware features, for example, a particular Video Processing
Unit  (VPU ) or Graphics Processing Unit  (GPU ) feature
When evaluating the software performance, QEMU may not be able to replicate the performance of
real hardware
While QEMU can be a valuable tool for testing and debugging software, it is not
always a perfect substitute for real hardware.
Using runqemu capabilities
QEMU is deeply integrated into the Yocto Project, and it is crucial to learn how
to take advantage of this integration so we can plan the testing of our projects.
The runqemu usage lists the variety of options available, which you can see in the
following figure:

--- Page 178 ---
Figure 16.1 – The runqemu usage
There are a few use cases of QEMU that are important to highlight:
Allows choosing different kernel images for testing
Allows choosing different rootfs  for booting
The capability to pass boot arguments for the kernel
Supports the use of a graphical environment with OpenGL or OpenGL ES options
It can pass extra QEMU command-line parameters
Allows the use of serial console-only for rapid image testing
Testing the audio stack support

--- Page 179 ---
Testing different init systems (e.g., systemd)
In the following few sections, we use the qemux86-64 machine as a reference to
cover some common use cases, illustrating the main runqemu capabilities.
Using runqemu to test graphical applications
When we aim to validate the application, ignoring the embedded device GPU
performance, we can rely on QEMU for such validation, for example, a Qt or
GTK+ application. At first, we need to build the core-image-weston image. Next, we
can run the validation as follows:
Figure 16.2 – The log af ter running QEMU with graphic support
Next, you see the execution of core-image-weston inside QEMU:

--- Page 180 ---
Figure 16.3 – Scr eenshot of QEMU running cor e-image-weston
The preceding screenshot shows the Wayland Terminal open, showing the
information of the running Linux kernel.
Using runqemu to validate memory constraints
When we aim to validate the application memory usage, we can rely on QEMU
for such validation. At first, we need to build the core-image-full-cmdline image
and run QEMU with the following command line:
Figure 16.4 – The log af ter running QEMU with 128 MB of R AM

--- Page 181 ---
In the following screenshot, we can see the amount of memory in use inside
QEMU:
Figure 16.5 – Scr eenshot of QEMU running cor e-image-full-cmdline with 128 MB of R AM
Changing the command line used to run QEMU can help us test a set of
different memory sizes via emulation.
Using runqemu to help with image regression
tests
The Yocto Project provides an automated testing framework, a crucial part of
the Yocto Project Quality Assurance process. The integration or validation
testing support uses the testimage class to execute the images inside the target.
TIP
The testing framework can test existing recipes and images and be enhanced with custom tests to validate
new applications and integrations. The testing framework capabilities are described in the section Types of
Testing Overview from Y octo Project Tests (https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/test-
manual/intro.html#yocto-project-tests-types-of -testing-overview ).
First, we enabled the testimage support by adding IMAGE_CLASSES += "testimage" in
build/conf/local.conf and made sure to build the core-image-weston image.
WARNING
During the image testing, the sudo  command is used for networking setup and may trigger an error
depending on your host conﬁguration. Check Yocto Project Development T asks Manual , in the Enabling
Runtime T ests on QEMU  section ( https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/common-
tasks.html#enabling-runtime-tests-on-qemu ) for how to avoid those errors.

--- Page 182 ---
Then, we must build the core-image-weston image. We are ready now to start the
execution of testimage with the following command:
Figure 16.6 – The r esult of running the testimage task for cor e-image-weston
In the preceding log, we see the regression test results.
Summary
In this chapter, we have learned how to use QEMU and how its capabilities can
shorten the development cycle by emulating when possible and describing
when it is not possible. It also presented some runqemu use cases.
In the final chapter, we offer a list of good practices that authors have been
using over the years in the development of Yocto Project-based products.

--- Page 183 ---
1 7
Best Practices
This chapter aims to provide insight into our (the authors’) personal experience
in working with embedded devices and embedded Linux development over the
years. We have gathered some aspects that are often underestimated or wholly
neglected to serve as inspiration for you in your next project.
We have split this chapter into two independent parts, one about the guidelines
related to the Yocto Project specifics and the other about more general aspects
of a project. This is so that you don’t have to study the two sections in a
particular order.
Guidelines to follow for Yocto Project
This section aims to gather some guidelines for aspects of the Yocto Project
metadata and project organization tips that make our life easier in terms of
short- and long-term maintenance.
Managing layers
As our journey in product development advances, we will naturally use multiple
repositories to meet the needs we face. Keeping track of the repositories is a
complex challenge as we need to do the following:
Make sure we can reproduce a previous build in the future
Allow multiple team members to work in the same code base
Validate the changes we make using Continuous Integration tools
Avoid subtle changes in the layers we use
Those goals are intimidating, but a few tools are in use, with different
strategies to overcome those challenges.
The simplest solution uses the image-buildinfo class
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/ref-manual/classes.html#image-buildinfo-
bbclass), which writes a plain text file containing build information and layers
revisions to the target filesystem at ${sysconfdir}/buildinfo by default. Some tools

--- Page 184 ---
have been developed that can help this process. These tools are discussed as
follows:
Google developed the repo  (https://source.android.com/docs/setup/download#repo) tool for Android
development. It has been adopted for use in other projects. A critical aspect of repo is that it requires
some tooling to integrate with Yocto Project-based projects to automate the build directory and
environment configuration. See the O.S. Systems Embedded Linux project
(https://github.com/OSSystemsEmbeddedLinux/ossystems-embedded-linux-platform) as inspiration
for using repo in your projects.
Siemens developed kas (https://github.com/siemens/kas) to provide an easy mechanism for
downloading sources, automating the build directory and environment configuration, and so on.
Garmin developed Whisk  (https://github.com/garmin/whisk) to manage complex product
configurations using OpenEmbedded and the Yocto Project. The key features are a single source tree,
multiple axes of configuration, multiple product builds, isolated layer configuration, and so on.
Agilent developed Yocto Buddy  (https://github.com/Agilent/yb). The design aims to ease the setup
and keep Yocto Project-based environments synchronized. Yocto Buddy was inspired by all previously
mentioned tools and is still early in development.
This is a subset of existing tools and shouldn’t be considered a complete list.
Ideally, you should play with them before deciding, as the choice depends on
the project use case and team expertise.
Avoid creating too many layers
A significant advantage of the Yocto Project is that it has the ability to use and
create multiple layers. It allows us to do the following:
Reuse BSP layers from semiconductor vendors
Reduce duplication of work by sharing reusable blocks to enable the use of new or specific
applications, programming languages, and so on.
However, creating multiple layers may be unproductive when developing a
project or a set of products. For example, the development of BSP-only layers
makes sense in the following situations:
The board is the product, as in the System on Module  (SoM ) vendors’ case
When external access to the layer is critical, however, we want to limit the access for the non-BSP
source
Using a single layer for the product, or even the company, has many
advantages, such as the following:
Facilitating the development of reusable components such as a packagegroup  package for
development tools or network utilities shared by multiple products

--- Page 185 ---
Reducing the risk of unexpected side effects due to changes for a specific product or board
Increasing the reuse of bug fixes across multiple products and reuse of BSP low-level components
such as the Linux kernel or bootloader
Boosting standardization across multiple products, reducing the learning curve for new team
members
The decision to use one or more layers depends on several aspects; however,
we recommend starting simple and, in the future, splitting the layer if required.
Prepare the product metadata for new Yocto
Project releases
As our product grows, so does our metadata and the need for good
organization. Some use cases commonly seen during product development are
as follows:
The need to backport a new recipe version due to a bug fix or a feature
A missing package configuration or bug fix is not yet available in the Yocto Project recipe
We use two recipe directories to organize this kind of content:
recipes-backport : Backports of recipes coming from new Yocto Project releases
recipes-staging : New recipes or bbappend  files adding missing package configurations or bug fixes
We continuously send new recipes or bug fixes from recipes-staging to the
respective upstream project (for example, OpenEmbedded Core). Then, when
the patch is accepted, we move this change from recipes-staging to the recipes-
backport directory. This approach allows us to keep track of pending
upstreaming tasks and easily upgrade our meta layer to a new Yocto Project
release. Furthermore, we can quickly act on the backport directory and remove
it.
Create your custom distro
When using the Yocto Project, we usually add many configurations in
build/conf/local.conf. However, as discussed in the book, this is bad as it is not at
source control management and is likely to differ among developers. Using a
custom distribution has many benefits, and some of them are highlighted here:
Allows consistent use among multiple developers

--- Page 186 ---
Provides a clear view of the different DISTRO_FEATURES  we use when compared to our base
distribution (for example, poky )
Provides a central place where we can have a global view of all the required recipe configurations we
need for our product, reducing the number of bbappend  files required to configure our recipes (for
example, PACKAGECONFIG:pn-<myrecipe>:append = " myfeature" )
Besides those more technical aspects, using a custom distro also allows the
proper branding of SDK or other Yocto Project-generated artifacts.
We learned how to create a custom distribution in the Using a custom
distribution sectiown in Chapter 12, Creating Custom Layers.
Avoid reusing existing images for your product
Images are where everything fits together. When we are developing a product,
it is important to minimize the number of packages we have installed in our
images for multiple reasons:
Reducing the rootfs size
Reducing the build time
Reducing the number of licenses to deal with
Reducing the surface of attack for security breaches
A typical starting point is copying the core-image-base.bb file to our custom layer
as myproduct-image.bb and extending it, adding what we need for the product’s
image. In addition, we create an image called myproduct-image-dev.bb for use
during development and make sure it requires myproduct-image.bb along with the
artifacts used only for development, avoiding code duplication. This way, we
have two images for production and development, but they share the same core
features and packages.
Standard SDK is commonly undervalued
Application development implies an interactive process, mainly because we
usually continuously build the application until we accomplish what we aim for.
This use case is not well suited for the Yocto Project, mainly for the following
reasons:
Every time we start the build of a recipe, it discards the previous build objects
The time needed for deploying the application or image is much longer

--- Page 187 ---
A lack of proper integration in the IDE environment
There are alternatives for a few of those topics, such as using devtool to reuse
the build objects and helping to deploy the application. We saw how to use
devtool in the Deploying to the target using devtool and Building a recipe using
devtool sections from Chapter 9, Developing with the Yocto Project, but the
development experience is still cumbersome.
Using Standard SDK for application and other components’ development, such
as the Linux kernel and bootloader, is still preferable. This way, we focus on
faster development, postponing or parallelizing the Yocto Project integration
task.
Avoid too many patches for Linux kernel and
bootloader modifications
The need for patches in the Linux kernel and bootloader is inherent to
embedded Linux development, as we rarely use the hardware without any
changes. The level of modification on those components is related to your
hardware design, for example:
Using a Single-Board Computer  (SBC), the number of changes should be minimal
In the use of System-On-Module  (SOM ) with a custom baseboard, the number of changes could vary
depending on the number of modifications from the vendor baseboard hardware design
Ultimately, the use of custom hardware design implies the development of a custom BSP and,
consequently, a considerable number of modifications
Those are not set in stone. So, for example, consider starting the project using
an SBC. Later, we find out that the vendor does not provide a good reference
BSP, so the number of modifications and amount of work for the BSP will
increase considerably.
When we have small changes, it is better to tackle the changes as patch files
added to the component recipe. But when the effort to maintain the component
increases, it justifies having a separate fork of that component to keep all the
changes in place. Using a repository fork gives us the following advantages:
The history of the changes
Different branches or tags for development and production
The possibility of merging with other providers

--- Page 188 ---
It allows the use of much simpler recipes, as we don’t need to carry on individual patches
In summary, we should use the strategy that makes sense for the project.
Eventually, this will change, but using the right approach reduces the total
effort to support the hardware in use properly.
Avoid using AUTOREV as SRCREV
The use of AUTOREV as SRCREV is usually applied when developing a product. We
must interactively change the code and try that code inside the Yocto Project.
That said, this comes with a couple of drawbacks:
It is hard to reproduce the previous build as every time we rebuild our image, it may use a different
revision for our recipe.
The AUTOREV  value is only applied when BitBake invalidates the cache of a specific recipe. That
happens when we modify the recipe itself or when we change something that triggers the BitBake
cache rebuild, such as changing any .conf  file.
Those drawbacks make AUTOREV very fragile, and other alternatives can cover the
interactive code change more consistently. Typically, devtool is used as it allows
us to change the code directly in the workspace and forces the recipe to use
this as the source. Another alternative is to use the externalsrc.bbclass class
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/index.html#ref-classes-externalsrc), which
allows us to configure a recipe to use a directory as the source for the build.
Create a Software Bill of Materials
The Poky build system can describe all the components used in an image from
the licenses for each software component. This description is generated as a
Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) using the Software Package Data
Exchange (SPDX) standard (https://spdx.dev/). Using the SPDX format has
the advantage of leveraging existing tooling, allowing extra automation, which
is impossible using Poky’s standard license output format.
The SBOM is critical to ensure open source license compliance. However, the
SBOM is not generated by default. You can refer to the Creating a Software Bill
of Materials section from The Yocto Project Development Tasks Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/common-tasks.html#creating-
a-software-bill-of-materials).

--- Page 189 ---
Guidelines to follow for general projects
This section discusses some project-related guidelines to follow to reduce the
general project risk and avoid common pitfalls.
Continuously monitor the project license
constraints
Depending on the project we are working on, license compliance might be a big
or a small topic. Some projects have very restricted license constraints, such as
the following:
The inability to use GPLv3-released software
Copyleft contamination of project-specific intellectual property
Company-wise license constraints
The advice is to start this process at the beginning of the project, reducing the
amount of rework throughout the project. However, the project license
constraints and the project component’s licenses may change, requiring us to
monitor our license compliance continuously.
Security can harm your project
In our hyper-connected era, every connected device is a potential target for a
security attack. As embedded device developers, we should contribute to a
safer place. We should do the following:
Scan our embedded Linux software for known security flaws
Monitor critical software for security fixes
Implement a process for fixing field devices
We can use the Yocto Project infrastructure, as discussed in the Checking for
Vulnerabilities section of Yocto Project Development Tasks Manual
(https://docs.yoctoproject.org/4.0.4/dev-manual/common-tasks.html#checking-
for-vulnerabilities), to scan for known Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures (CVE) for our recipes. We should not be limited to this as our BSP
components might also require security fixes, which the BSP vendors commonly
neglect. Still, the paranoia level depends on the project niche.

--- Page 190 ---
Don’t underestimate maintenance costs
At first, upstreaming our changes might not seem strategic for the following
reasons:
Upstreaming uses resources to adapt modifications
Upstream review feedback may require additional interactions and rework
Development work not directly connected to the product needs to be done
Usually, development and management teams underestimate the total cost of
maintenance. But unfortunately, this is frequently the most expensive part of
the project, as it lasts for years. Upstreaming our changes to the respective
project allows us to do the following:
Avoid work duplication over the years
Reduce the friction during upgrades for new Yocto Project releases
Receive critical and constructive feedback about the changes we are upstreaming
Reduce the amount of work with security updates and bug fixes
Reduce the amount of code we have to maintain
The upstream work is continuous. Every time we add a new feature, we
potentially increase the gap between our code and the upstream. Therefore, we
may postpone the upstreaming work, but the upstreaming costs will be
multiplied when you work on updating to the next Yocto Project release.
Tackle project risk points and constraints as soon
as possible
As the software and hardware must work together, a few aspects directly
depend on our hardware design. To reduce the project risk, we should
anticipate as many critical software and hardware requirements as possible so
we can validate some aspects, such as the following:
Is the amount of memory we intend to use enough or too much?
Is the amount of power the hardware uses sufficient for our constraints?
Is the target GPU capable of rendering the animations we need?
Do all the planned peripheral devices have available Linux kernel drivers ready for use or do we need
to plan the development for those?

--- Page 191 ---
The preceding questions can be answered using a reference or well-known
board, which we have ready to use BSP. This allows us to produce a Minimal
Viable Product (MVP) without the need to design our custom hardware. After
we validate the project’s risks and constraints, those boards are still valuable
assets for the following:
Continuing the development of our software until the custom board and BSP are ready for use
As a base of comparison with our custom design
As a reference to verify whether a bug is specific to our custom board and BSP
Considering we can develop our software using a reference or a well-known
board, we should postpone the design of a custom board for as long as possible.
Delaying the design gives us the freedom to change many aspects of our
project, such as changing a peripheral because of a specific driver or even
changing the planned CPU and memory capabilities after maturing the
application and features.
When we finally decide to go with a custom design, we should keep it as close
as possible to the board we choose as a reference. But, of course, sometimes
we need to deviate from the reference design. Still, it comes with the risk of
introducing design issues and increasing the cost of our custom BSP.
Summary
Phew! In this final chapter, you have been introduced to a set of good practices
that the authors have been using in their real-life projects. We hope they have
given you some points to consider when planning your next project.
Throughout the book, we have covered the necessary background information
for you to learn any other aspect of the Yocto Project that you may need on
your own. So, you now have a general understanding of what is happening
behind the scenes when you ask BitBake to build a recipe or an image. From
now on, you are ready to free your mind and try new things. The ball is in your
court now – here’s where the fun begins!

--- Page 192 ---
I n d e x
As this ebook edition doesn't have ﬁxed pagination, the page numbers below
are hyperlinked for reference only, based on the printed edition of this book.
S y m b o l s
+= operator 72
=+ operator 72
:= operator
used, for immediate variable expansion 72
??= operator
used, for assigning default value 71, 72
?= operator
used, for assigning value 71
.= operator 73
=. operator 73
:append operator 73, 74
.bbappend files 69
.bbclass files 69
.bb files 69
.conf files 69
.inc file 75
:prepend operator 73, 74
:remove operator
used, for removing list item 74
A
application debugging

--- Page 193 ---
versus metadata debugging 91
Autotools-based application
extra configuration, adding 124, 125
B
base package recipe
creating, with devtool 115, 116
BeagleBone Black
features 143
image, baking 143, 144
image, booting 144
reference link 143
BitBake 39
execution flow 50
logging functions, in Python 95
logging functions, in Shell Script 95
metadata collection 31, 32
metadata types 33, 34
reference link 3
tasks 45-47
bitbake-layers tool 105-110
BitBake recipe (.bb) 37
BitBake’s metadata 69
:append operator 73, 74
:prepend operator 73, 74
:remove operator 74
classes 69
conditional appending 75

--- Page 194 ---
conditional metadata set 74, 75
configuration files 69
default value, assigning with ??= operator 71, 72
executable metadata, defining 76
file inclusion 75
immediate variable expansion 72
inheritance system 77
list appending 72
list prepending 72
Python functions, defining in global namespace 76, 77
Python variable expansion 75
recipes 69
string appending 73
string prepending 73
value, assigning with ?= operator 71
variable assignment 70
variable expansion 70
working with 70
BitBake User Manual
reference link 70
Board Support Package (BSP) layer 102
aspects, reviewing that impact hardware use 141, 142
discovering 141
usage 142
build directory
constructing 49, 50
detailing 49

--- Page 195 ---
buildhistory class 92
reference link 92
buildhistory-diff utility 92
Build History mechanism 91, 92
build host system preparation
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSLv2), running 7, 8
build/tmp/work directory 51-54
buildtools tarball 8
C
classes 69
CMake 37, 115
commercial licenses 135, 136
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) 163
configuration files 69
configuration fragments 129
for Kconfig-based projects 129-132
configuration metadata 122
conf/layer.conf 32
copyleft compliance 133
achieving, with Poky 136
versus proprietary code 134
copyleft compliance, achieving with Poky
compilation scripts, providing 138
license auditing 136
license text, providing 139
source code modifications 138
source code, providing 137, 138

--- Page 196 ---
cross-development SDKs 79
Extensible SDK 80
Standard SDK 80
types 80
CROss PlatformS (CROPS) 7
custom layers
creating 109-111
metadata, adding 111
D
Debian Package Manager (DEB) 57
debugging
GNU DeBugger (GDB), using for 98
debug process 91
dependencies 37, 38
types 37
development shell 96
utilizing 96-98
devshell command 96-98
devtool
base package recipe, creating with 115, 116
image, building with 85
recipe, building with 88
target, deploying with 88
DISTRO_FEATURES
versus MACHINE_FEATURES 122
E

--- Page 197 ---
End Of Life (EOL) 4
executable metadata
defining 76
existing packages
extra files, adding 126, 127
use cases 123, 124
Extensible SDK 80
extending 89
image, building with devtool 85
image, running on QEMU 85, 86
recipe, building with devtool 88
recipe, creating from external Git repository 87, 88
target, deploying with devtool 88, 89
using 83, 84, 85
external Git repository
recipe, creating from 87, 88
F
fetcher backends 40
file
searching paths 127, 128
file inclusion 75
G
general projects 162
maintenance costs 163
project license constraints, monitoring 162
project risk points and constraints 164

--- Page 198 ---
security attack 163
General Public License (GPL)v2 license 133
Gentoo Portage package 2
Git
reference link 9
Git repositories 41, 42
GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) 133
GNU DeBugger (GDB) 91
using, for debugging 98
graphical applications
testing, with runqemu 152, 153
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) 150
I
image
building, for QEMU 21-29
content, tracking 91, 92
image-buildinfo class
reference link 158
image regression tests
helping, with runqemu 154, 155
include keyword 75
inheritance system 77
Itsy Package Management System (IPK) 58
K
Kconfig-based projects
configuration fragments 129-132

--- Page 199 ---
L
layers 31, 32
flexibility, powering with 101-103
properties 102
source code, detailing 103, 104
lazy evaluation 70
Linux-based system, preparing 8, 9
Debian-based distribution 9
Linux Kernel Archives
URL 2
list
appending 72
prepending 72
logging information
providing, during task execution 95
Long Term Support (LTS) 4
LTTng 113
M
MACHINE_FEATURES
versus DISTRO_FEATURES 122
memory constraints
validating, with runqemu 153, 154
Meson 115
meta-browser layer 102
metadata
parsing 35-37
metadata, adding to custom layer

--- Page 200 ---
age recipe, adding 114, 115
custom distribution, using 119-121
image, creating 111-113
support, adding to machine definition 117, 118
metadata debugging
versus application debugging 91
metadata layers 101
functionalities 101
metadata variables
debugging 95, 96
meta-java layer 102
meta layers 102
adding 104, 105
meta-poky layer 102
meta-qt5 layer 102
meta-raspberrypi meta layer
reference link 145
meta-riscv meta layer
reference link 146
meta-yocto-bsp layer 102
reference link 143
Minimal Viable Product (MVP) 164
N
native build 79
Native Language Support (NLS) 121
native SDK 79
generating, for on-device development 80

--- Page 201 ---
network access
disabling 44
O
oe-pkgdata-util script 94
OpenEmbedded community
URL 105
OpenEmbedded Core 3, 4
reference link 4
OpenEmbedded project 2
OpenGL 119
OpenZaurus project 2
overrides 74, 75
OVERRIDES conditional appending 75
P
package epoch 61
package feeds 64, 65
using 65-67
package installation
code, running 58-60
packages
content, tracking 91, 92
inspecting 93, 94
used, for generating rootfs image 63, 64
package versioning
explaining 61, 62
packaging

--- Page 202 ---
debugging 93
partitioned image 118
patch
applying 125
physical hardware
using 142, 143
Pluggable Authentication Module (PAM) 121
Poky 3, 92
BitBake 3
components 3
copyleft compliance, achieving with 136
metadata 4
OpenEmbedded Core 4
software licensing, managing with 134
porky-based system
build environment, preparing 10, 11
build host system, preparing 7
images, running in QEMU 15-17
local.conf file 12
source code, downloading 9, 10
target image, building 13, 14
PREFERRED_PROVIDER keyword 38, 39
proprietary code
versus copyleft compliance 134
PROVIDES keyword 38, 39
PR service 65
Python functions

--- Page 203 ---
defining, in global namespace 76, 77
Python variable expansion 75
Q
Quality Assurance (QA) 4, 149
Quick EMUlator (QEMU) 149
image, building 21-29, 85, 86
images, running in 15-17
use cases 151
versus hardware usage 150
R
Raspberry Pi 4
features 143
image, baking 145
image, booting 145
URL 143
ready-to-use image
creating 118, 119
real hardware
selection, situations 150
Real Time Operating System (RTOS) 1
recipe feature configuration
modifying 128, 129
recipes 69
dependency 38
Red Hat Package Manager (RPM) 57
remote file downloads 40, 41

--- Page 204 ---
repo tool
reference link 158
require keyword 75
root filesystem (rootfs) 136
generating, with packages 63, 64
runqemu capabilities
using 150-152
using, to help with image regression tests 154, 155
using, to test graphical applications 152, 153
using, to validate memory constraints 153, 154
runtime package dependencies
specifying 62, 63
S
Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux) 121
shared state cache 60, 61
Single-Board Computer (SBC) 161
Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) 162
software development kit (SDK) 64, 79
content, tracking 91, 92
cross-development SDKs 79
native SDKs 79
software licensing
managing, with Poky 134
Software Package Data Exchange (SPDX) 162
source code
fetching 39, 40
Git repositories 41, 42

--- Page 205 ---
remote file downloads 40, 41
source code download
network access, disabling 44
optimizing 42, 43
Standard SDK 80
using 81, 82
string
appending 73
prepending 73
supported package formats, BitBake 58
selecting 58
using 57
Debian Package Manager (DEB) 57
Red Hat Package Manager (RPM) 57
Tar 58
sysroot directories 54, 55
System on Module (SoM) 158, 161
T
Tape Archive (Tar) 58
task 45
extending 124
temporary build directory (build/tmp)
exploring 50, 51
Toaster 19, 27
initializing 20, 21
installing 19
reference link 19

--- Page 206 ---
using, methods 19
toolchain 79
V
value
assigning, with ??= operator 71, 72
assigning, with ?= operator 71
variable
assignment 70
expansion 70
scope 122
Video Processing Unit (VPU) 150
virtual/kernel provider 38, 39
VisionFive
features 143
image, baking 146
image, booting 146
reference link 143
W
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSLv2) 7
X
X11 support 119
Y
Yocto Project 1, 2, 157
AUTOREV as SRCREV usage, avoiding 161
best practices 147
custom distro, creating 159

--- Page 207 ---
delineating 2
existing images, avoiding 160
layers, managing 157, 158
layer ecosystem 105, 106
multiple layers, avoiding 158, 159
patches for bootloader modifications, avoiding 161
patches for Linux kernel, avoiding 161
product metadata, preparing 159
releases 4
Software Bill of Materials (SBOM), creating 162
standard SDK 160
Standard SDK 161

--- Page 208 ---
Packt.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and
videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career. For more information, please visit our
website.
Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over 4,000
industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with
PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at
packt.com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the
eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more
details.
At www.packt.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign
up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
Packt books and eBooks.
Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:

--- Page 209 ---
Robotics at Home with Raspberry Pi Pico
Danny Staple
ISBN: 9781803246079

--- Page 210 ---
Interface Raspberry Pi Pico with motors to move parts
Design in 3D CAD with Free CAD
Build a simple robot and extend it for more complex projects
Interface Raspberry Pi Pico with sensors and Bluetooth BLE
Visualize robot data with Matplotlib
Gain an understanding of robotics algorithms on Pico for smart behavior

--- Page 211 ---
Embedded Systems Architecture - Second Edition
Daniele Lacamera
ISBN: 9781803239545

--- Page 212 ---
Participate in the design and definition phase of an embedded product
Get to grips with writing code for ARM Cortex-M microcontrollers
Build an embedded development lab and optimize the workflow
Secure embedded systems with TLS
Demystify the architecture behind the communication interfaces
Understand the design and development patterns for connected and distributed devices in the IoT
Master multitasking parallel execution patterns and real-time operating systems
Become familiar with Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
Packt is searching for authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit
authors.packtpub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands of
developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their
insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application,
apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit
your own idea.
Share Your Thoughts
Now you’ve finished Embedded Linux Development Using Yocto Project, we’d
love to hear your thoughts! If you purchased the book from Amazon, please
click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share
your feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it from.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make
sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.
Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere? Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your
choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of
that book at no cost.

--- Page 213 ---
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from
your favorite technical books directly into your application. 
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below
https://packt.link/fr ee-ebook/9781804615065
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly
